CHAPTER 4

4.1

Then the Blessed One spoke these words to Subhūti: “Subhūti, do you know
how many beings in the world90 display their knowledge 91 under the
influence of conceit? Do you know how many beings in the world display
their knowledge without conceit?”
Subhūti answered, “Blessed One, according to my knowledge, there are
only a few in the world of beings who present their knowledge without
conceit, but countless, innumerable, and inexpressible in number are those
who do so under its influence. Blessed One, at one time I was staying in a
hermitage set in a great forest. There were many monks living in the vicinity
who had also established themselves there. At sunrise, I saw them gather
together. They showed their knowledge and revealed their understanding
by taking various aspects of phenomena as referential objects.92

4.2

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the five aggregates as
referential objects: their phenomenal appearance, their arising, their
disintegration, [F.10.a] their cessation, and the acknowledgment of their
cessation. In the same way, some showed their knowledge by taking the
twelve sense domains as referential objects, some by taking dependent
arising as a referential object. Some showed their knowledge by taking the
four kinds of sustenance as referential objects: their phenomenal
appearance, their arising, their disintegration, their cessation, and the
acknowledgment of their cessation.

4.3

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the four noble truths as
referential objects: their defining characteristic, the comprehension of
suffering, the abandoning of the cause of suffering, the actualization of the
cessation of suffering, and the practice of the path.

4.4

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the eighteen constituents as
referential objects: their phenomenal appearance, their varieties, their
manifoldness, their cessation, and the actualization of their cessation.

4.5

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the four applications of
mindfulness as referential objects: their phenomenal appearance, their
adverse factors, their antidotes, their practice, their arising from having been
non-arisen, their remaining after they arose, and their maintaining,
resuming, or increasing. In the same way, some showed their knowledge by
taking as referential objects the four correct self-restraints, as well as the four
bases of supernatural powers, the five faculties, the five forces, and the
seven branches of awakening. Some showed their knowledge by taking as
referential objects the eight branches of the noble path: [F.10.b] their
phenomenal appearance, the antidotes to their adverse factors, their practice,
their arising from having been non-arisen, their remaining after they arose,
and their maintaining, resuming, or increasing.93

4.6

“Then I thought to myself, ‘These venerable monks displayed their
knowledge by revealing their understanding by taking various aspects of
phenomena as referential objects, but they have not perceived the ultimate,
whose defining characteristic is of a single nature 94 everywhere.’ These
venerable persons have conceit and, without doubt, display their knowledge
under the influence of conceit. Blessed One, at an earlier time, you spoke
these words: ‘The ultimate is subtle, profound, difficult to understand,
extremely difficult to understand, and characterized as being of a single
nature everywhere.’ How wonderful indeed are these very words of yours!
Blessed One, if even those who practice your teaching, such as these beings
who became monks, find it difficult to understand in this way the ultimate
whose defining characteristic is of a single nature everywhere, what need is
there to mention how difficult it is for those outsiders who do not follow
your teaching?”

4.7

The Blessed One replied, “So it is, Subhūti. So it is. I have completely and
fully awakened to the ultimate that, being characterized as being of a single
nature everywhere, is subtle, extremely subtle, profound, extremely
profound, difficult to understand, and extremely difficult to understand. Yet,
after I attained complete and perfect awakening, [F.11.a] I communicated
through words, gave explanations, established distinctions, expressed
myself through conventions, and imparted teachings. One might ask why I
did this.

4.8

“Subhūti, it is because I teach that the ultimate is the referential object
conducive to purification95 within the aggregates, as well as within the
sense domains, dependent arising, the sustenances, the truths, the
constituents, the applications of mindfulness, the self-restraints, the bases of
supernatural powers, the faculties, the forces, the branches of awakening,
and, Subhūti, the eightfold path. This referential object conducive to
purification within the aggregates is of a single nature everywhere and its

defining characteristic is not different from theirs. It is just the same from the
sense domains up to the eightfold path: the referential object conducive to
purification within these various referential objects is of a single nature
everywhere and its defining characteristic is not different from theirs.
Subhūti, through this approach, you should thus know that what is
characterized as being of a single nature everywhere is the ultimate.96
4.9

“Moreover, Subhūti, once renunciants who practice yoga have realized in
reference to a single aggregate the selflessness of phenomena, which is the
ultimate reality,97 they do not look for this ultimate reality, this selflessness,
individually within the other aggregates or in the sense domains, dependent
arising, the sustenances, the truths, the constituents, the applications of
mindfulness, the self-restraints, the bases of supernatural powers, the
faculties, the forces, the branches of awakening, and the eightfold path.
Instead, they rely upon the nondual gnosis 98 that is in accordance with true
reality. Through this alone,99 [F.11.b] they infallibly ascertain and realize the
ultimate, characterized as being of a single nature everywhere. Subhūti,
through this approach, you should thus know that what is characterized as
being of a single nature everywhere is the ultimate.

4.10

“Moreover, Subhūti, if ultimate reality itself, the selflessness of
phenomena, had a defining characteristic distinct [from the defining
characteristics of phenomena] in the way the aggregates, the sense domains,
dependent arising, the sustenances, the truths, the constituents, the
applications of mindfulness, the self-restraints, the bases of supernatural
powers, the faculties, the forces, the branches of awakening, and the
eightfold path have defining characteristics distinct from one another, then,
on account of this, ultimate reality itself, the selflessness of phenomena,
would have causes and arise from causes. If it arose from causes, it would be
conditioned. If it were the conditioned, it would not be the ultimate. If it were
not the ultimate, one would need to look for some other ultimate. Subhūti,
this ultimate, the selflessness of phenomena, does not arise from causes. It is
not conditioned. Neither is it the case that it is not the ultimate. One must
[therefore] not look for an ultimate other than that ultimate. Thus, whether
tathāgatas manifest or not, because it is the case that it permanently and
immutably abides within phenomena, only this nature of phenomena, this
constituent abiding in phenomena, is constant.100 Subhūti, for all these
reasons, you should know through this approach that the ultimate is
characterized as being of a single nature everywhere.

4.11

“Subhūti, it is like this: although there are many varieties of forms with
distinct defining characteristics within space, since space itself is free from
phenomenal appearances, [F.12.a] devoid of conceptions, and without
change, its defining characteristic is of a single nature everywhere. Likewise,

Subhūti, you should know that the ultimate is characterized as being of a
single

nature

everywhere, within

all

phenomena

whose

characteristics are distinct from one another.”
4.12

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“As proclaimed by the buddhas,
This ultimate is not distinct from phenomena,
And its defining characteristic is everywhere of a single nature.
Those who imagine it to be distinct from phenomena
Are conceited and deluded.”
This was the chapter of Subhūti—the fourth chapter.

defining

5.

