CHAPTER 9

9.1

Then the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara addressed the Blessed One, “Blessed
One, the ten stages of the bodhisattva are called (1) Utmost Joy, (2) Stainless,
(3) Illuminating, (4) Radiant, (5) Hard to Conquer, (6) Manifest, (7) Far
Reaching, (8) Immovable, (9) Excellent Intelligence, and (10) Cloud of
Dharma. When taken together with the eleventh, [called] Buddha Stage, in
how many kinds of purification and subdivisions are they included?”

9.2

The Blessed One answered, “Avalokiteśvara, you should know that they
are included in four kinds of purification and eleven subdivisions.
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the first stage is included in the
purification of intention; the second, in the purification of superior discipline;
and the third, in the purification of superior mind; while stages four to
eleven are included in the purification of superior wisdom, which gradually
leads to perfection from stage to stage. These stages are thus included in
four kinds of purification.

9.3

“What are the eleven levels —the subdivisions including the ten stages of
the bodhisattva and the Buddha Stage?
1. “On the first level consisting of actions based on superior265 devotion,
bodhisattvas cultivate superior devotion and patience 266 by engaging in the
ten practices related to Dharma.267 Once they have passed beyond this stage,
they will enter the faultless state of truth of the bodhisattvas.268
2. “Although the first level is accomplished by these practices, [F.39.b] the
second level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to act while
being aware of confusion resulting from subtle transgressions. By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.
3. “Although the second level is accomplished by this practice, the third
level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to settle into a perfect
mundane concentration and recollect what they have heard. By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.

4. “However, the fourth level is not thereby accomplished, because the
bodhisattvas, who frequently engage in practicing the awakening factors 269
in the way they obtained them, are still unable to settle their minds due to
attachment to states of absorption and the teaching.270 By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.
5. “Although the fourth level is accomplished through this practice, the
fifth level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to fully examine
the truths or settle in superior equanimity regarding saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
which they exclusively reject or focus upon, respectively. They are still
unable to practice the awakening factors in conjunction with skillful means.
By striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.
6. “Although the fifth level is accomplished by this practice, the sixth level
is not, because, even once they have recognized the activities of conditioned
states for what they are, the bodhisattvas are still unable to maintain for long
an aversion toward them. They are also still unable to remain for long
directing their attention toward what lacks phenomenal appearances. By
striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.
7. “Although the sixth level is accomplished by this practice, the seventh
level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to remain without
hindrance and interruption while directing their attention toward what lacks
phenomenal appearance. By striving to accomplish this level, they will
succeed. [F.40.a]
8. “Although the seventh level is accomplished by this practice, the eighth
level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to rest in equanimity
while striving to abide in what lacks phenomenal appearance. They are also
still unable to attain mastery over phenomenal appearance. By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.
9. “Although the eighth level is accomplished by this practice, the ninth
level is not because the bodhisattvas are still unable to masterfully teach the
Dharma in all its aspects by using synonyms, definitions, explanations, and
categories. By striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.
10. “Although the ninth level is accomplished by this practice, the tenth
level is not because the bodhisattvas are still unable to obtain the analytical
knowledge of the perfect truth body. By striving to accomplish this level,
they will succeed.
11. “Although the tenth level is accomplished by this practice, the eleventh
level is not because the bodhisattvas are still unable to obtain the gnosis and
vision that are utterly free from attachment and hindrance regarding all
cognitive objects.271 By striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.

“Since this level is accomplished by this practice, all levels are
accomplished. Avalokiteśvara, you should know that all the stages are
included in these eleven levels.”
9.4

“Blessed One, why is the first stage called Utmost Joy? Why are the other
stages up to the Buddha Stage called what they are?”
1. “The first stage is called Utmost Joy because there is a supreme and
immense joy in attaining the immaculate and sublime purpose, the
supramundane mind.
2. The second stage is called Stainless because it is free from all stains
consisting in [even] subtle transgressions or faulty discipline.272
3. The third stage is called Illuminating because it is the very state of
concentration and recollection imbued with the immeasurable light of
gnosis.273 [F.40.b]
4. The fourth stage is called Radiant because the fire of gnosis produced
by the practice of the awakening factors is set ablaze 274 in order to burn the
fuel of afflictions.
5. The fifth stage is called Hard to Conquer because it is difficult indeed to
master the practice of these very awakening factors in conjunction with
skillful means.275
6. The sixth stage is called Manifest because the activity of conditioning
mental factors becomes manifest, as does the bodhisattvas’ attention that is
repeatedly directed toward what lacks phenomenal appearance.
7. The seventh stage is called Far Reaching because once the bodhisattvas
engage for a long time without hindrance and interruption while directing
their attention toward what lacks phenomenal appearance, this stage is
connected with the subsequent stages of purification.
8. The eighth stage is called Immovable because what lacks phenomenal
appearance is spontaneously accomplished and the bodhisattvas are
unshaken by the manifestation of defilements resulting from phenomenal
appearance.
9. The ninth stage is called Excellent Intelligence because the bodhisattvas
obtain a vast intelligence that flawlessly masters all aspects related to
teaching the Dharma.
10. The tenth stage is called Cloud of Dharma because the body afflicted by
corruption, which is as empty as the sky, is pervaded and covered by the
accumulation of Dharma276 that is like a [great] cloud.277
11. The eleventh stage is called Buddha Stage because once one has
abandoned the most subtle defiling and cognitive obstructions, one
completely and perfectly awakens and knows all aspects to be known,278
without attachment and hindrance.”

9.5

“Blessed One, how many kinds of delusion and adverse factors of
corruption are there on these stages?”
“Avalokiteśvara, there are twenty-two kinds of delusion and eleven
adverse factors of corruption:
1. “On the first stage, there is the delusion of wrongly conceiving the
person and phenomena, the delusion of bad destinies, and the adverse factor
of the corruption resulting from these.
2. “On the second stage, there is the delusion of confusion resulting from
subtle transgressions, [F.41.a] the delusion related to the various aspects of
the maturation of karma, and the adverse factor of the corruption resulting
from these two.
3. “On the third stage, there is the delusion of desire, the delusion of
perfectly remembering what was heard, and the adverse factor of the
corruption resulting from these.
4. “On the fourth stage, there is the delusion of attachment to the states of
absorption, the delusion of attachment to Dharma, and the adverse factor of
the corruption resulting from these.
5. “On the fifth stage, there is the delusion of attending to saṃsāra as
exclusively negative or positive, the delusion of attending to nirvāṇa as
exclusively negative or positive, and the adverse factor of the corruption
resulting from these.
6. “On the sixth stage, there is the delusion of making manifest the activity
of conditioning mental factors, the delusion of the many manifesting
phenomenal appearances, and the adverse factor of corruption resulting
from these.279
7. “On the seventh stage, there is the delusion of the manifestation of
subtle phenomenal appearances, the delusion toward skillful means since
one’s attention is exclusively directed toward what lacks phenomenal
appearance, and the adverse factor of the corruption resulting from these.
8. “On the eighth stage, there is the delusion of exerting oneself toward
what lacks phenomenal appearance, the delusion of not having mastery over
phenomenal appearances, and the adverse factor of the corruption resulting
from these.
9. “On the ninth stage, there is the delusion of having mastery in the
boundless teaching and expression of Dharma, the delusion of having
mastery in continuously keeping it in mind in terms of wisdom and
eloquence,280 the delusion of having command of eloquent speech, and the
adverse factor consisting in the corruption resulting from these two types of
delusion.

10. “On the tenth stage, there is the delusion with regard to the sublime
superior knowledge, the delusion of engaging in what is secret and subtle,
and the adverse factor consisting of the corruption resulting from these two.
11. “On the Buddha Stage, there is the delusion of the extremely subtle
attachment to cognitive objects, the delusion of the extremely subtle
hindrance related to defilements, and the adverse factor consisting of the
corruption resulting from these two. [F.41.b]
“Avalokiteśvara, this is a presentation of the stages according to twentytwo kinds of delusion and eleven types of corruption. The unsurpassable,
complete and perfect awakening does not have any of them.”
“In which case,281 Blessed One, the unsurpassable, complete and perfect
awakening, the most sublime blessing and result, is truly wondrous! Once
bodhisattvas have torn the great net of delusion in this fashion and gone
beyond the vast jungle of corruption, they will awaken to the complete and
perfect enlightenment.”282
9.6

“Blessed One, through how many kinds of purifications are these stages
presented?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are presented through eight purifications: (1) the
purification of intention, (2) the purification of the mind, (3) the purification
of compassion, (4) the purification of the perfections, (5) the purification of
the vision of buddhas and of their veneration, (6) the purification of bringing
beings to maturity, (7) the purification of birth, and (8) the purification of
power.
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the purifications on the first stage,
from the purification of superior intention up to the purification of power, as
well as the purifications on the higher stages including the Buddha Stage,
from the purification of superior intention up to the purification of power,
become more and more intense.283 Thus, if one excepts the purification of
birth on the Buddha Stage, the qualities on the first stage seem similar to
those of the higher stages. However, you should know that the qualities of
each higher stage are superior to those on the former stage. You should also
understand that the qualities on the ten stages of a bodhisattva can be
surpassed, whereas the qualities on the Buddha Stage are unsurpassable.”

9.7

“Blessed One, why did you declare that, among all kinds of birth, the birth
of a bodhisattva is supreme?” [F.42.a]
“Avalokiteśvara, it is supreme for four reasons: (1) it accomplishes the
great purification of one’s roots of virtue, (2) it is appropriated as a result of
mental inspection, (3) it is imbued with the compassion that protects all
beings, and (4) it is not itself afflicted, but it repels the afflictions of others.”

9.8

“Blessed One, why did you declare that bodhisattvas practice with a vast
aspiration, are sublime, have a sublime aspiration, and possess the force of
aspiration?”
“Avalokiteśvara, [I declared this] for four reasons: (1) bodhisattvas are
skilled with respect to the blissful state of nirvāṇa, (2) they are able to attain
it swiftly, (3) they have both given up this swift attainment and this blissful
state, and (4) without wavering or being compelled,284 they mentally
produce the aspiration to go for a long time through many kinds of suffering
for the sake of beings. Therefore, I said that bodhisattvas possess a vast
aspiration, a sublime aspiration, and the force of aspiration.”

9.9

“Blessed One, how many foundations of training do the bodhisattvas
have?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they have six: generosity, discipline, patience, diligence,
meditative absorption, and wisdom.”
“Blessed One, among those six, how many constitute the training in
superior discipline, how many constitute the training in superior mind, and
how many constitute the training in superior wisdom?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the first three constitute the
training in superior discipline, meditative absorption constitutes the training
in superior mind, wisdom constitutes the training in superior wisdom, and
diligence is present in each of these trainings.” [F.42.b]
“Blessed One, how many of these foundations of training constitute the
accumulation of merit? How many constitute the accumulation of gnosis?”
“Avalokiteśvara, the training in superior discipline constitutes the
accumulation of merit. The training in superior wisdom constitutes the
accumulation of gnosis. Diligence and meditative absorption are present in
both.”
“Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas train in these six foundations of
training?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they train in these six foundations of training according
to five points: (1) by having devotion from the beginning for the teaching of
the pure Dharma, for the teaching of the six perfections, and for the
collection of teachings on the bodhisattva [path]; (2) by accomplishing next
the wisdom arising from hearing, contemplating, and practicing [the truth]
through the ten activities related to Dharma; (3) by preserving the
awakening mind; (4) by relying upon a virtuous friend; and (5) by
continuously practicing virtue.”
“Blessed One, why are the foundations of training known in terms of a
sixfold classification?”

“Avalokiteśvara, there are two reasons: (1) they benefit beings and (2) they
are antidotes to defilements. You should know that, among them, three
benefit beings while three are antidotes to defilements.
1. “Through their generosity, bodhisattvas benefit beings by providing
them with what is necessary to life; through their discipline, they benefit
beings by not impoverishing them, harming them, or ridiculing them; and
through their patience, they benefit beings by enduring impoverishment,
harm, and ridicule. Thus, they benefit beings through these three
foundations of training.
2. “Through their diligence they apply themselves to the virtue that
completely overcomes defilements and eliminates them, since defilements
are unable to deflect them from this practice; through their meditative
absorption [F.43.a] they destroy defilements; and through their wisdom they
put an end to their latent dispositions. Thus, these three foundations of
training are antidotes to defilements.”
9.10

“Blessed One, why are the other perfections known in terms of a fourfold
classification?”
“Avalokiteśvara, it is because they assist these six perfections:
1. “With the first three perfections, bodhisattvas benefit beings. Then, they
establish beings in virtue through the skillful means consisting of the four
methods of conversion. Therefore, I taught that the perfection of skillful
means assists the first three perfections.
2. “Avalokiteśvara, suppose the bodhisattvas are unable to practice at all
times in this life as a result of their many defilements. Suppose they are
unable to focus their minds within due to the weakness of their superior
intention as a result of their limited experience 285 and aspiration. Suppose
they are unable to accomplish the supramundane wisdom because they did
not practice the meditative absorption based on the referential objects
corresponding to the teachings on the bodhisattva path they have heard.
However, since they have accumulated merit, even to a limited extent, they
produce with their minds the aspiration that their defilements will decrease
in the future. This is the perfection of aspiration. Because defilements
decrease and bodhisattvas are able to exert their diligence through this
perfection, the perfection of aspiration therefore assists the perfection of
diligence.
3. “Then, relying on a noble being and on hearing the Dharma, they attain
the state in which they direct their attention on discipline. Once they have
turned away from having a superior intention whose power is limited, they
obtain the power of intention of the heavenly realms.286 This is the perfection

of power. Because bodhisattvas are able to focus on their minds within
through this perfection, the perfection of power therefore assists the
perfection of meditative absorption. [F.43.b]
4. “The bodhisattvas settle in meditative absorption as they practice the
referential objects corresponding to the teachings on the bodhisattva path
they have heard. This is the perfection of wisdom. Because bodhisattvas are
able to accomplish supramundane wisdom through this perfection, the
perfection of gnosis therefore assists the perfection of wisdom.”
9.11

“Blessed One, why should one know that the six perfections are taught in
this order?”
“Avalokiteśvara, it is because the former is the support on which the latter
is established, and so on and so forth. By not fixating on their bodies and
possessions, bodhisattvas acquire discipline. By maintaining their discipline,
they take possession of patience. Through patience, they engage in
diligence. By having engaged in diligence, they establish meditative
absorption. Once meditative absorption is established, they will obtain the
supramundane wisdom.”

9.12

“Blessed One, of how many kinds are these perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, each of these perfections is of three kinds:
1. “The three kinds of generosity are the gift of Dharma, the gift of material
objects, and the gift of fearlessness.
2. “The three kinds of discipline are the discipline that turns away from
what is not virtuous, the discipline that engages in virtue, and the discipline
that engages in benefiting beings.
3. “The three kinds of patience are the patience of enduring harm, the
patience of not considering [one’s own] suffering, and the patient
acceptance of Dharma by means of reflection.287
4. “The three kinds of diligence are the diligence that is like armor, the
diligence to practice virtue, and the diligence to benefit beings.
5. “The three kinds of meditative absorption are the meditative absorption
of blissful abiding that, nonconceptual and peaceful, is an antidote to
defilements and suffering, the meditative absorption that brings about good
qualities, and the meditative absorption that accomplishes the welfare of
beings. [F.44.a]
6. “The three kinds of wisdom are the wisdom that takes the conventional
truth as its referential object, the wisdom that takes the ultimate truth as its
referential object, and the wisdom that takes the welfare of beings as its
referential object.”

9.13

“Blessed One, why are the perfections called ‘perfections’?”

“Avalokiteśvara, this is for five reasons. The perfections are without
attachment, disinterested, free from faults, nonconceptual, and dedication of
merit:
1. “Being without attachment, they are completely devoid of attachment to
factors adverse to themselves.
2. “Being disinterested, they are free from thoughts fixating on results or
on some reward obtained from their accomplishment.
3. “Being free from faults, they are not involved with afflicted phenomena
and lack unskillful means.
4. “Being nonconceptual, they are free from any literal assumption of
having a defining characteristic specific to them.
5. “Being dedication of merit, they are the aspiration for the result of the
bodhisattva

path

by

having

produced

and

accumulated288

these

perfections.”
9.14

“Blessed One, what are the factors adverse to the perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that there are six factors: (1)
considering as beneficial the joy produced by desirous objects, (2) indulging
into pleasurable activities through one’s body, speech, or mind, (3) not
enduring contempt with patience, (4) invoking merit to justify one’s lack of
diligence, (5) being distracted by occupations, entertainment, and people,
and (6) considering as beneficial the conventional mental elaborations
arising from what one sees, hears, thinks, or is conscious of.”

9.15

“Blessed One, what is the result of the maturation of these perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, [F.44.b] you should know that there are six: (1) great
wealth, (2) rebirth in pleasant destinies, (3) happiness and satisfaction from
peace and concord, (4) sovereignty over beings, (5) the absence of physical
harm, and (6) the renown of having great powers.”

9.16

“Blessed One, how are these perfections involved with afflicted
phenomena?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are involved through four practices: (1) the practice
of the perfections without compassion, (2) the improper practice of the
perfections, (3) the irregular practice of the perfections, and (4) the negligent
practice of the perfections.
“The improper practice of the perfections occurs when the practice of one
of these perfections impairs the practice of the other perfections.”

9.17

“Blessed One, what are unskillful means?”
“Avalokiteśvara, the bodhisattvas assist beings by means of these
perfections. If they do not establish beings in virtue once they have pulled
them from nonvirtuous states and instead are satisfied to merely provide
material objects to them, this is unskillful means. Why? Avalokiteśvara, one
does not assist beings by merely doing this. It is like this: excrements,

whether in large or small quantity, cannot be made to smell good by any
method289 whatsoever. Likewise, no method that merely supports beings
with material objects can make happy those who are suffering because their
nature is to experience the suffering arising from being conditioned.290 In
contrast, establishing them in virtue is the best and only way to benefit
them.”
9.18

“Blessed One, how many kinds of purification are [included] in these
perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, I did not state that there were other purifications apart
from the five kinds [I have already mentioned].291 However, in relation to
what I have already explained, [F.45.a] I will clarify for you the (1) general
and (2) specific purifications included in the perfections.
1. “You should know that the general purifications that are common to all
perfections include seven points: (1) bodhisattvas do not seek to make a
profit from others through the teachings on the bodhisattva path; (2) they do
not produce wrong conceptions with regard to these teachings; (3) with
respect to these teachings, they do not give rise to indecision or doubts as to
whether they will attain awakening or not; (4) they do not praise themselves,
nor do they blame others or despise them; (5) they do not generate arrogance
or carelessness; (6) they are not satisfied with only limited or inferior
attainments; and (7) they are not stingy or envious of others because of these
teachings.
2. “You should know that the purifications specific to each perfection also
includes seven points:
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
generosity are as follows: (1) bodhisattvas practice generosity that is the
purification of generosity through the purification292 of the object that is the
gift, and (2–7) they practice generosity that is the purification of generosity
through the purification of discipline, view, mind, speech, knowledge, and
stains. Thus, as I have just explained, the purifications included in the
perfection of generosity that bodhisattvas obtain and practice constitute the
seven aspects of the purification of generosity.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
discipline are as follows: (1) bodhisattvas are skilled in all aspects of the
foundation of training related to vows, (2) they are skilled in removing
transgressions, (3) their discipline is free from doubts, (4) they have a firm
discipline, (5) they maintain discipline in all circumstances, (6) they engage
in discipline at all times, and (7) they engage in the training by correctly
practicing the foundations of training. These are the seven aspects of the
purification of discipline.

“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of patience
are as follows: (1) when confronted with any kind of adversity, bodhisattvas
do not waver because they are confident in the maturation of their karma;
[F.45.b] (2) they do not engage in harming others by abusing, insulting,
striking, intimidating, or criticizing them in order to retaliate; (3) they do not
hold grudges; (4) when accused,293 they do not give rise to defilements; (5)
they themselves do not indulge in accusations; (6) they do not practice
patience with a mind that is fearful of consequences or interested; and (7)
they do not fail to accomplish others’ benefit. These are the seven
purifications of patience.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
diligence are as follows: (1) bodhisattvas understand the equanimity of
diligence; (2) with reference to diligence, they neither praise themselves nor
deprecate others; (3–6) they are powerful, diligent, enthusiastic, and
resolute; and (7) they never cease to be diligent with respect to virtuous
qualities. These are the seven purifications of diligence.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
meditative absorption are (1) the meditative absorption in the concentration
that understands phenomenal appearance, (2) the perfect meditative
absorption

in

concentration, (3) the

meditative

absorption

in

the

concentration that has these two aspects, (4) the meditative absorption in the
spontaneously arising concentration, (5) the meditative absorption in the
concentration without support, (6) the meditative absorption in the
concentration that produces flexibility, and (7) the meditative absorption in
the concentration in the boundless practice of the referential objects
corresponding to the teachings on the bodhisattva path. These are the seven
purifications of meditative absorption.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of wisdom
are as follows: (1) Once they have abandoned the extremes of
superimposition and negation by means of wisdom, bodhisattvas emerge
[from cyclic existence] through the middle path. (2) On account of this
wisdom, they realize the very meaning of the gate to liberation exactly as it
is, namely, the threefold gate to liberation: emptiness, wishlessness, and
appearancelessness. (3) They realize exactly as it is the very meaning of
essence, namely, the threefold essence: the imaginary, the other-dependent,
and the actual. (4) They realize exactly as it is the very meaning of
essencelessness, namely, the threefold essencelessness regarding defining
characteristics, arising, and the ultimate. [F.46.a] (5) They realize exactly as it
is the very meaning of the conventional truth in relation to the five
sciences.294 (6) They realize exactly as it is the very meaning of the ultimate
truth with respect to the seven aspects of true reality. (7) They frequently

abide in the unique approach of the nonconceptual state free of mental
elaborations. By means of the insight that takes countless universal
teachings as its referential object, they correctly accomplish the attainment
resulting from the practice of the teachings that are in harmony with
Dharma. You should know that these are the seven purifications of
meditative absorption.”
9.19

“Blessed One, what is the function of each of these five purifications?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the five functions are as follows:
(1) Having no attachment, the bodhisattvas continuously practice the
perfections in this life. Because they practice them with enthusiasm, they are
conscientious. (2) Being disinterested, they obtain the cause for the careful
practice of these perfections in their future lives. (3) Free of any wrongdoing,
they practice the perfect, pure, and stainless perfections. (4) Unburdened by
conceptions, they swiftly perfect the perfections through their skillful means.
(5) Because they transfer their merit, they will attain in all their future lives
the inexhaustible perfections together with the desirable results produced
by the maturation of their karma, until they obtain the unsurpassable,
complete and perfect awakening.”

9.20

“Blessed One, what is the vastness of the bodhisattvas’ practice of these
perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, bodhisattvas are without attachment and disinterested,
and they transfer their merit.”
“In what way are they without afflictions?”
“They are free of any wrongdoing and conceptions.”
“In what way are they stainless?”
“They act as they mentally inspect.”
“In what way are they immovable?”
“They are said to be immovable because this is the nature of those who
have entered the stages of a bodhisattva.” [F.46.b]
“In what way are the perfections utterly pure?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are included within the tenth stage and the Buddha
Stage.”

9.21

“Blessed One, why is the desirable result of the maturation resulting from
the practice of the perfections always inexhaustible 295 in the case of the
bodhisattvas? Why do they obtain this inexhaustibility through the
perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, it is because they practice each perfection296 in
dependence upon the others.”

9.22

“Blessed One, why is it that bodhisattvas do not have faith in the desirable
result of the maturation resulting from the practice of the perfections in the
way they have faith in the perfections?”

“Avalokiteśvara, this is due to five reasons: (1) The perfections are the
cause for the highest bliss and happiness, (2) they are the cause for the
benefit of oneself and others, (3) they are the cause for the desirable result of
their maturation in future lives, (4) they are the foundation of the freedom
from afflictions, and (5) they have the nature of immutability.”
9.23

“Blessed One, what are their specific powers?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that their specific powers have the
following four qualities: (1) When the bodhisattvas practice the perfections,
they eliminate adverse factors, such as greed, faulty discipline, mental
agitation, laziness, distraction, and wrong views; (2) they will attain the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening; (3) in this life, they will
benefit themselves as well as beings; and (4) in future lives they will attain
the desirable result of their maturation, which is vast and inexhaustible.”

9.24

“Blessed One, from what cause do these perfections arise? What are their
result and benefit?”
“Avalokiteśvara, the perfections have compassion as their cause. As result,
they have the desirable result of their maturation and [F.47.a] the result
accomplishing the benefit of beings. As benefit, they have the great benefit
of accomplishing the great awakening.”

9.25

“Blessed One, if the bodhisattvas have inexhaustible resources as well as
compassion for beings, why are there poor people in the world?”
“Avalokiteśvara, this is nothing but the fault resulting from beings’ own
karma. If it were not so, if no obstruction were brought about by beings’ own
faults, bodhisattvas could at all times engage in compassionate activities
toward them. As bodhisattvas have inexhaustible resources, how could the
vision of suffering manifest? Avalokiteśvara, it is like this: hungry ghosts
whose bodies are tormented by thirst perceive the waters of the ocean as a
dry and barren place. This is not the fault of the ocean but the fault resulting
from the maturation of nothing but these hungry ghosts’ own karma.
Likewise, the absence of result is not the fault of the bodhisattvas’
generosity, which is like the ocean, but the fault of beings themselves, the
fault resulting from the karma of those who are like hungry ghosts.”

9.26

“Blessed One, through which perfection do bodhisattvas apprehend
essencelessness?”297
“Avalokiteśvara, they apprehend it through the perfection of wisdom.”
“Blessed One, when they apprehend essencelessness through the
perfection of wisdom, why then do they not apprehend that essencelessness
has an essence?”298
“Avalokiteśvara, I did not declare that essencelessness is apprehended by
means of an essence.299 However, if one does not use expressions to teach, it
is impossible to explain that this essencelessness is inexpressible and

cognized

intuitively.

On

this

basis,

I

said

that

they

perceive

essencelessness.”
9.27

“Blessed One, what is called perfection, immediate perfection,300 and great
perfection?” [F.47.b]
1. “Avalokiteśvara, bodhisattvas possess virtuous qualities, generosity
and so on, that they have practiced over immeasurable periods of time. But
when defilements arise in them, they are unable to overcome them and,
instead, are overcome by them. Thus, this inferior and intermediate
aspiration on the stage where one proceeds by means of aspiration is called
perfection.
2. “Then, bodhisattvas possess virtuous qualities that they have practiced
during further immeasurable periods of time. When defilements arise in
them, these bodhisattvas overcome them and cannot be overcome by them.
Thus, taking hold of these qualities beginning with the first stage is called
immediate perfection.
3. “Next, bodhisattvas possess virtuous qualities that they have practiced
during even longer immeasurable periods of time. In the bearer of such
qualities, no defilement arises at all. Thus, taking hold of these qualities
beginning with the eighth stage is called great perfection.”301

9.28

“Blessed One, how many kinds of latent dispositions toward defilements
are there on the stages?”
“Avalokiteśvara, there are three:302
1. “The latent dispositions that destroy the factors conducive to the
manifestation of defilements are as follows: on the first five stages, the
factors conducive to the manifestation of innate defilements are non-innate
defilements. At that point, these factors do not manifest. As a consequence,
these latent dispositions are called latent dispositions that destroy the factors
conducive [to the manifestation of defilements].
2. “The latent dispositions of limited power are as follows: on the sixth and
seventh stages, subtle aspects of the latent dispositions manifest and
through practice are suppressed. Therefore, as a consequence of this subtle
manifestation, these latent dispositions are called latent dispositions of limited
power.
3. “The subtle latent dispositions are as follows: on the eighth stage and
above, defilements do not manifest at all because there only remain cognitive
obstructions to be cleared. Therefore, these latent dispositions are called
subtle latent dispositions.”

9.29

“Blessed One, how many kinds of elimination of corruption characterize
these latent dispositions?”303

“Avalokiteśvara, there are three kinds:304 (1) the elimination of superficial
corruption

characterizes

the

first and the

second type

of latent

dispositions]305 (2) the elimination of deeper corruption characterizes [F.48.a]
the third type of latent dispositions, and (3) since the elimination of the
innermost corruption is the state in which there are no latent dispositions at
all, I have taught that it is the Buddha Stage.”
9.30

“Blessed One, after how many eons are these types of corruption
eliminated?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are abandoned within three incalculable periods of
time —within immeasurable eons, seasons, moons, half-moons, days and
nights, days, half days, hours, minutes, seconds, or split seconds.”

9.31

“Blessed One, how should the defining characteristic, the fault, and the
positive quality of defilements arising in bodhisattvas be known?”
1. “Avalokiteśvara, defilements arising in bodhisattvas have the defining
characteristic of nondefilement. Why? Because they fully realize the domain
of truth, which is only determined on the first stage. On account of this, the
defilements

of

bodhisattvas

arise

only

with

full

awareness,

not

unconsciously. Therefore, [defilements arising in bodhisattvas have] the
defining characteristic of nondefilements.
2. “Because they do not have the capacity to produce suffering in
[bodhisattvas’] own [mental] continuums, they are faultless.
3. “Because they are the cause dispelling the suffering from the world of
beings, they have boundless positive qualities.”
“Blessed One, if even the defilements arising in this way in bodhisattvas
outshine the roots of virtue produced by all beings, hearers, and solitary
realizers to such an extent, what need is there to mention their other positive
qualities?306 The supreme value of the bodhisattvas’ awakening is truly
amazing!
9.32

“Blessed One, what was your underlying intention when you declared
that the vehicle of the hearers and the Great Vehicle constitute the Single
Vehicle?” [F.48.b]
“In the vehicle of the hearers, I taught the essence of various phenomena,
such as the five aggregates, the six internal sense domains, the six external
sense domains, and so forth. In the Great Vehicle, I presented exactly these
same phenomena by teaching them in terms of a single principle, the domain
of truth. Therefore, I did not declare that [these two] vehicles are distinct
from one another. Those who conceptualize these teachings exclusively
according to their literal meaning also conceptualize these [two] vehicles as
being distinct—some by superimposing, others by negating. As a

consequence, they think that the two vehicles are contradictory307 and thus
refute one another. This is what I had in mind when I taught the Single
Vehicle.”
9.33

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“The very teachings on the nature of various phenomena
Taught in the lower and higher vehicles
Are teachings of a single principle.
This is why I did not declare the vehicles to be distinct from one another.
“Those who conceptualize according to the literal meaning of the teachings
Think that these vehicles are contradictory
As a result of their superimpositions and negations,
And so from delusion arise various opinions.
“The buddhas taught as the Great Vehicle
What is included within the stages of a bodhisattva and a buddha,
The names of these stages, and their adverse factors, specific arising,
aspiration, and training.
Those who will exert themselves in this will become buddhas.”
Then, the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
what is the name of the teaching imparted in this Dharma discourse that
unravels the Tathāgata’s intent? How should I keep it in mind?”
The Blessed One answered, “Avalokiteśvara, this is a teaching of
definitive meaning on the stages and the perfections. Keep it in mind as The
Teaching of Definitive Meaning on the Stages and the Perfections. As the Blessed
One expounded this teaching, seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas obtained
the bodhisattva’s concentration, the light of the Great Vehicle. [F.49.a]
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara—the ninth chapter.

10.

