CHAPTER 6

6.1

Then, the bodhisattva Guṇākara asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One, when
bodhisattvas who are skilled in the defining characteristics of phenomena
are called ‘skilled in the defining characteristics of phenomena,’ what does it
mean? Moreover, when the Tathāgata designates them as such, what does it
refer to?”

6.2

The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Guṇākara, “Guṇākara, for the
benefit and happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, for
the welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, including gods and
humans, you are asking this. Your intention is excellent when questioning
the Tathāgata on this specific point. Therefore, listen, Guṇākara, I will
explain to you in which way bodhisattvas are skilled in the defining
characteristics of phenomena.

6.3

“Guṇākara, the defining characteristics of phenomena are three. What are
these three? They are the imaginary defining characteristic, the otherdependent defining characteristic, and the actual defining characteristic.120

6.4

“Guṇākara, what is the imaginary defining characteristic [of phenomena]?
It is what is nominally and conventionally posited121 as the essence or the
distinctive [characteristic] of phenomena, even just122 in order to
designate 123 [them].124

6.5

“Guṇākara, what is the other-dependent defining characteristic [of
phenomena]? It is the dependent arising of phenomena. It is like this: ‘When
this is, that arises; because this arises, that arises.’ It is also from ‘[in
dependence upon ignorance as a condition,] conditioning mental factors
[arise]’ up to ‘thus, the whole great mass of suffering comes to be.’ [F.14.b]

6.6

“Guṇākara, what is the actual125 defining characteristic [of phenomena]? It
is their true reality, namely, the unsurpassable complete and perfect
awakening that is finally attained by bodhisattvas as they realize this [true
reality] through their diligence and correct application of mind and then
become perfectly familiar with the realization of this [true reality].126

6.7

“Guṇākara, it is like this: you should consider the imaginary defining
characteristic to be just like 127 the falsity of the visual aberrations [perceived]
by someone suffering from the timira visual disorder.
“Guṇākara, it is like this: you should consider the other-dependent
defining characteristic to be just like the phenomenal appearances
manifesting to this very person suffering from the timira disease, such as
[actually nonexistent] hairs, flies, sesame seeds, [or patches of] blue, yellow,
red, or white [in their visual field].
“Guṇākara, it is like this: you should consider the actual defining
characteristic to be just like the original and unerring visual object seen by
the same person when their vision is healthy and free from the visual
aberrations resulting from the timira disease.

6.8

“Guṇākara, it is like this: when a pure crystal is in contact with something
blue, it appears to be a sapphire. Because people perceive it by mistake as a
sapphire, they are deceived by it. When this pure crystal is in contact with
something red, green, or yellow, it appears to be a ruby, an emerald, [F.15.a]
or gold. Because people perceive it by mistake as a ruby, an emerald, or gold,
they are deceived by it.

6.9

“Guṇākara, it is like this: You should consider the mental imprint of
conventions in terms of an imaginary defining characteristic128 upon the
other-dependent defining characteristic to be just like the contact of colors
with a pure crystal. Thus, you should consider the perception of an
imaginary defining characteristic [superimposed] on the other-dependent
defining characteristic to be just like the mistaken perception of a sapphire,
ruby, emerald, or gold [superimposed] on the pure crystal.
Guṇākara, it is like this: You should consider the other-dependent
defining characteristic to be just like this pure crystal itself. Thus, you should
consider the actual defining characteristic as the permanent and immutable
lack of any actuality or essence in the imaginary defining characteristic
[superimposed] on the other-dependent defining characteristic,129 just as
there is permanently and immutably no actuality or essence in the defining
characteristic of a sapphire, ruby, emerald, or gold [superimposed] on a pure
crystal.

6.10

Thus, Guṇākara, bodhisattvas distinctly perceive 130 the imaginary
defining characteristic on the basis of names denoting phenomenal
appearances.131 They distinctly perceive the other-dependent defining
characteristic

on

the

basis

of

the

erroneous

conception132

superimposes] an imaginary defining characteristic
134

dependent defining characteristic.

133

[that

on the other-

They distinctly perceive the actual

defining characteristic on the basis of the nonexistence of any erroneous
conception [that superimposes] an imaginary defining characteristic on the
other-dependent defining characteristic.
6.11

“Guṇākara, when bodhisattvas distinctly perceive the imaginary defining
characteristic [superimposed] on the other-dependent defining characteristic
of phenomena exactly as it is, they distinctly perceive the phenomena devoid
of any defining characteristic exactly as they are. [F.15.b] Guṇākara, when
bodhisattvas distinctly perceive the other-dependent defining characteristic
exactly as it is, they distinctly perceive the phenomena characterized by
affliction exactly as they are. Guṇākara, when bodhisattvas distinctly
perceive the actual defining characteristic exactly as it is, they distinctly
perceive the phenomena characterized by purification exactly as they are.
Guṇākara, when bodhisattvas distinctly perceive the phenomena devoid of a
defining characteristic [superimposed] on the other-dependent defining
characteristic

exactly

as

they

are, they

abandon

the

phenomena

characterized by affliction. Once they have abandoned the phenomena
characterized by affliction, they will obtain the phenomena characterized by
purification. Guṇākara, since bodhisattvas distinctly perceive in this way the
imaginary,

other-dependent,

and

actual

defining

characteristics

of

phenomena exactly as they are, they distinctly perceive the phenomena
devoid of a defining characteristic, those characterized by affliction, and
those characterized by purification exactly as they are.135 Having distinctly
perceived the phenomena devoid of a defining characteristic exactly as they
are, they abandon the phenomena characterized by affliction. Once they
have abandoned the phenomena characterized by affliction, they will obtain
the phenomena characterized by purification. For all these reasons,
bodhisattvas are skilled in the defining characteristics of phenomena.
Moreover, when the Tathāgata designates the bodhisattvas as ‘skilled in the
defining characteristics of phenomena,’ it is for these reasons.”
6.12

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“Once the phenomena devoid of defining characteristics have been
distinctly perceived,
The phenomena characterized by affliction will be abandoned. [F.16.a]
Once the phenomena characterized by affliction have been abandoned,
The phenomena characterized by purification will be obtained.
“Careless beings, overcome by wrongdoing and indulging in laziness,
Do not realize the imperfection of conditioned phenomena.
Falling apart in the midst of fleeting phenomena,
They deserve 136 compassion.”
This was the chapter of Guṇākara —the sixth chapter.

7.

