CHAPTER 8

8.1

Then, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked a question to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas practice mental stillness and insight in the
Great Vehicle, what is their support and basis?”
The Blessed One answered, “Maitreya, their support and basis are the
discourses teaching Dharma and the constant aspiration to attain the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening.

8.2

“The Blessed One taught that four things are the referential objects of
mental stillness and insight: the image with conceptualization; the image
without conceptualization; the point where phenomena end; and the
accomplishment of the goal.”
“Blessed One, how many referential objects of mental stillness are there?”
“There is [only] one, namely, the image without conceptualization.”
“How many are the referential objects of insight?”
“There is only one, namely, the image with conceptualization.”
“How many are the referential objects of both combined?”
“There are two, namely, the point where phenomena end and the
accomplishment of the goal.”

8.3

“Blessed One, once bodhisattvas have taken as a support and basis these
four things that are the referential objects of mental stillness and insight,
how do they dedicate themselves to mental stillness? How do they become
skilled in the practice of insight?”
“Maitreya, I have given to the bodhisattvas discourses teaching Dharma in
the following twelve collections of teachings: sūtras, discourses in prose and
verse, prophecies, poetic discourses, aphorisms, discourses for specific
beings, narratives, parables, discourses on previous lives, extensive
discourses,

teachings

on

miracles,

and

instructions. [F.26.b]

Once

bodhisattvas have properly heard these explanations, once they have
memorized them well, recited them, examined them, and understood them
by means of discernment, they remain alone in seclusion and settle

themselves in a state of inner absorption. Then, they direct their attention in
that (1) they direct their attention toward the teachings they have properly
contemplated176 and (2) continuously direct their attention inwardly toward
the mind that is directing attention. As they repeatedly engage themselves in
this way, their bodies and minds become flexible. The occurrence of this
physical and mental flexibility is what is called mental stillness. This is how
bodhisattvas dedicate themselves to mental stillness.
8.4

“Once they have obtained177 this physical and mental flexibility, they
settle in this very state and abandon some aspects of mind [corresponding to
mental stillness].178 Then, they apply themselves to analyzing the image that
is the object of their concentration according to the teachings they have
properly

contemplated. Differentiating,

discerning,

considering,

and

examining in this way the cognitive aspects of the image that is the object of
their concentration, accepting and wishing to do so, and distinguishing,
scrutinizing, and investigating [this discerning mind in the same way] is
what is called [the practice of] insight. This is how bodhisattvas are skilled in
insight.”
8.5

“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas direct their attention inwardly toward
the mind that takes the mind as its referential object but have not yet
attained physical and mental flexibility, what do you call their practice of
directing attention?”
“Maitreya, this is not yet mental stillness. So you should refer to it as a
practice aspiring to mental stillness.”
“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas direct their attention toward the image
that is the object of their concentration according to the teachings they have
properly contemplated, but they have not yet attained physical and mental
flexibility, what do you call their practice of [F.27.a] directing attention?”
“Maitreya, this is not yet insight. So you should refer to it as a practice
aspiring to insight.”

8.6

“Blessed One, should we refer to the path of mental stillness and the path
of insight as being distinct or indistinct from one another?”
“Maitreya, we should refer to them as neither distinct nor indistinct. Why
are they not distinct? Because mental stillness takes mind, which is the
referential object of insight, as its object. Why are they not indistinct?
Because insight takes a conceptual image as its referential object.”

8.7

“Blessed One, what image do bodhisattvas focus on as their object of
concentration? Should we consider it as distinct from mind or not?”179
“Maitreya, we must consider that it is not distinct from mind. Why?
Because this image is merely a representation. Maitreya, I have explained
that cognition is constituted180 by the mere representation that is the
referential object [of this cognition].”181

“Blessed One, if this image that is the object of concentration is not distinct
from the mind, how does this very mind investigate itself?”
“Maitreya, [ultimately] no phenomenon whatsoever investigates any
phenomenon at all. However, the mind that arises as [if it were conscious of
an object] appears as [if it were investigating itself]. Maitreya, it is like this:
based on a form [in front of a mirror], you see that same form on the clear
surface of this mirror and realize that you are seeing a reflection, an image in
which this reflection and the form [it is based on] appear to be distinct
objects. Likewise, the mind arising as [if it were conscious of an object] and
what is called its image, the object of concentration, appear as if they were
distinct objects.”182
8.8

“Blessed One, should we say that mental images naturally present to
beings, such as the appearance of material form and so forth, [F.27.b] are also
not distinct from mind?”183
“Maitreya, we should say that they are not distinct. However, foolish
beings with erroneous ideas do not understand just as it is that [mental]
images are mere representations. As a consequence, their minds are
mistaken.”

8.9

“Blessed One, when do the bodhisattvas practice only insight?”
“Whenever they direct their attention184 toward mental appearances 185
without interruption.”
“When do the bodhisattvas practice only mental stillness?”
“Whenever they direct their attention toward the unimpeded mind
without interruption.”
“When do they combine both insight and mental stillness and unite them
evenly?”
“Whenever they direct their attention toward the one-pointedness of
mind.”
“Blessed One, what is a mental appearance?”
“Maitreya, this is the referential object of insight, the conceptual image
that is the object of concentration.”
“What is the unimpeded mind?”
“Maitreya, it is the referential object of mental stillness, the mind that takes
the image as an object.”
“What is one-pointedness of mind?”
“[One-pointedness of mind is] realizing in regard to the image that is the
object of concentration, ‘This is merely a representation,’ and, on realizing
that, directing one’s attention toward true reality.”186

8.10

“Blessed One, how many kinds of insight are there?”
“Maitreya, there are three: insight arising from phenomenal appearance,
insight arising from inquiry, and insight arising from awakening.”187

“What is insight arising from phenomenal appearance?”
“It is the insight in which attention is directed exclusively toward a
conceptual image, the object of concentration.”
“What is insight arising from inquiry?”
“It is the insight in which attention is directed in order to perfectly
understand whatever phenomena were not yet understood by means of
wisdom.”188 [F.28.a]
“What is insight arising from awakening?”
“It is the insight in which attention is directed on whatever phenomena
one perfectly understood by means of wisdom in order to attain the
happiness of liberation.”
8.11

“How many kinds of mental stillness are there?”
“There are three kinds of mental stillness corresponding to the unimpeded
mind. Maitreya, it is also said to be of eight kinds: the first, second, third, and
fourth meditative absorptions, the domain of the infinity of space, the
domain of infinite cognition, the domain of nothingness, and the domain of
neither conception nor lack of conception. It is also of four kinds:
immeasurable loving-kindness, immeasurable compassion, immeasurable
joy, and immeasurable equanimity.”

8.12

“Blessed One, you have mentioned ‘mental stillness and insight that are
established in Dharma’ and ‘mental stillness and insight that are not
established in Dharma.’ What do these terms mean?”
“Maitreya, the mental stillness and insight that are established in Dharma
are the mental stillness and insight whose object is in agreement with
phenomenal appearance as presented in the teachings that bodhisattvas
have understood and contemplated.
“You should know that the mental stillness and insight that are not
established in Dharma are the mental stillness and insight whose object,
being unrelated to the teachings that bodhisattvas have understood and
contemplated, is based on other instructions or precepts, such as taking as
referential objects putrefying or festering corpses as well as any other similar
objects, the impermanence of all conditioned phenomena, the suffering
[inherent to all conditioned phenomena], the selflessness of all phenomena,
and nirvāṇa as the state of peace.189
“Maitreya, regarding this, I consider those bodhisattvas who follow the
teaching based on the mental stillness and insight established in Dharma to
possess sharp faculties. As for those faithfully following the teaching based
on the mental stillness and insight that are not established in Dharma, I
consider them to possess inferior faculties.” [F.28.b]

8.13

“Blessed One, you also mentioned ‘the mental stillness and insight with a
specific190 teaching as a referential object’ and ‘the mental stillness and
insight with a universal teaching as a referential object.’ What do these terms
mean?”
“Maitreya, suppose that bodhisattvas practice the mental stillness and
insight that take as a referential object an individual teaching, such as a
specific discourse, among all the teachings they have understood and
contemplated. This is called mental stillness and insight with a specific teaching as
a referential object.
Now, suppose that bodhisattvas unify, condense, subsume, or gather
teachings from various discourses into a single one, thinking that all these
teachings converge toward true reality, lean toward true reality, and tend
toward true reality; converge toward awakening, lean toward awakening,
and tend toward awakening; converge toward nirvāṇa, lean toward nirvāṇa,
and tend toward nirvāṇa; and converge toward a shift in one’s basis of
existence,191 lean toward a shift in one’s basis of existence, and tend toward
a shift in one’s basis of existence. Thinking that all these teachings actually
refer to the immeasurable and infinite virtuous truth,192 they direct their
attention [toward their referential object]. This is [called] mental stillness and
insight with a universal teaching as a referential object.”

8.14

“Blessed One, you also mentioned mental stillness and insight ‘with a
fairly universal teaching as a referential object,’ ‘with a highly universal
teaching as a referential object,’ and ‘with an infinitely universal teaching as
a referential object.’ What do these terms mean?”
“Maitreya, suppose the bodhisattvas gather together [the meaning of]
each of the twelve collections of my teaching, from the sūtras up to the
extensive discourses, the teachings on miracles, and the instructions. [F.29.a]
Having done so, they direct their attention toward this referential object.
This should be known as the mental stillness and insight with a fairly universal
teaching as a referential object.
When the bodhisattvas gather together193 all the teachings or discourses
they have understood and contemplated and then direct their attention onto
this referential object, this should be known as the mental stillness and insight
with a highly universal teaching as a referential object.
“When the bodhisattvas gather together the teachings imparted by the
tathāgatas that refer to the infinite truth,194 the infinite words and letters
expressing it, and the ever-increasing infinite wisdom and eloquence of the
tathāgatas and then direct their attention toward this referential object, this
should be known as the mental stillness and insight with an infinitely universal
teaching as a referential object.”

8.15

“Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas obtain mental stillness and insight
with a universal teaching as a referential object?”
“Maitreya, you should know that they obtain them through five causes: (1)
At the time of directing their attention, they destroy all supports of
corruption in every moment. (2) After giving up the variety of conditioned
phenomena, they rejoice in the joy of Dharma. (3) They perfectly know the
immeasurable and unceasing brilliance of Dharma in the ten directions. (4)
They bring together, without conceptualizing them, the phenomenal
appearances that are imbued with the accomplishment of the goal and in
harmony with the element conducive to purification. (5) In order to attain,
perfect, and accomplish the truth body, they seize the most supreme and
auspicious cause.”

8.16

“Blessed One, how should we know at which point the bodhisattvas
cognize and obtain the mental stillness and the insight that have a universal
teaching as a referential object?”
“Maitreya, you should know that they cognize them on the first
bodhisattva stage, Utmost Joy, and obtain them on the third stage,
Illuminating. Maitreya, in spite of this, even beginners among bodhisattvas
should not abstain from training in them and directing their attention toward
their referential object.”

8.17

“Blessed One, in what way do mental stillness and insight become a
concentration associated with mental engagement195 and investigation?
[F.29.b] In what way do they become a concentration not with mental
engagement but with investigation only? In what way do they become a
concentration without either mental engagement or investigation?”
“Maitreya, when mental stillness and insight attend to experiences of the
manifest and coarse 196 phenomenal appearances mentioned in the teachings
the bodhisattvas have understood, investigated, and examined, this is the
concentration associated with mental engagement and investigation.
“When mental stillness and insight do not consist in attending the
experiences corresponding to the manifest and coarse phenomenal
appearances mentioned in their teachings but consist in being merely
mindful of appearances, namely, in attending the experience of subtle
phenomenal appearances,197 this is a concentration not with mental
engagement but with investigation only.
“When mental stillness and insight consist in practicing by directing one’s
attention toward the experience of the effortless Dharma with regard to each
and every phenomenal appearance mentioned in these teachings, this is a
concentration without either mental engagement or investigation.

“Moreover, Maitreya, mental stillness and insight arising from inquiry
consist in a concentration associated with mental engagement and
investigation. The mental stillness and insight arising from awakening is a
concentration not with mental engagement but with investigation only.198
The mental stillness and insight taking a universal teaching as its referential
object consist in a concentration without either mental engagement or
investigation.”
8.18

“Blessed One, what is the cause of mental stillness? What is the cause of
setting the mind? What is the cause of equanimity?”
“Maitreya, when one feels excited or feels one might become excited, one
directs one’s attention toward phenomena that induce sorrow and the
unimpeded mind.199 This is what is called the cause of mental stillness.
“Maitreya, when one feels drowsy or feels one might become drowsy, one
directs one’s attention toward phenomena that induce joy and mental
appearance.200 This is what is called the cause of setting the mind.
“Maitreya, whether one is devoted to mental stillness or insight only,
[F.30.a] or practices them in union, when one applies one’s mind without
being affected by these two secondary defilements,201 [namely agitation and
drowsiness,] one directs one’s attention spontaneously. This is what is called
the cause of equanimity.”

8.19

“Blessed One, the bodhisattvas who practice mental stillness and insight
possess the analytical knowledge of designations as well as the analytical
knowledge of the objects of designation.202 In what way do they possess
these analytical knowledges?”
“Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of designations comprises five points:
names, phrases, letters, their individual apprehension, and their collective
apprehension. What is a name? It is that which superimposes a so-called
essential or distinctive characteristic on the phenomena conducive to
affliction and purification for the sake of communication. What is a phrase? It
is that which is based on a collection of those very names taken as its
support and basis in order to designate objects of affliction and purification.
What are letters? They are phonemes acting as the basis for both names and
phrases. What is the analytical knowledge that apprehends them
individually? It is the analytical knowledge resulting from directing one’s
attention toward a specific referential object. What is the analytical
knowledge that apprehends them collectively? It is the analytical knowledge
resulting from directing one’s attention toward a general referential object.
When all these five points are put together, this should be known as the
analytical knowledge of designations. This is how bodhisattvas possess the
analytical knowledge of designations.

8.20

“Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of the objects of designation
comprises ten points: the diversity of things and the nature of things;203 the
apprehending subject and the apprehended object; the abodes and objects of
enjoyment; wrong view and correct view; and the object conducive to
affliction and the object conducive to purification. [F.30.b]
1. “Maitreya, all204 the various divisions of phenomena conducive to
affliction and purification according to their aspects represent the diversity
of things, namely, the fivefold enumeration of the aggregates, the sixfold
enumeration of the internal sense domains, the sixfold enumeration of the
external sense domains, and so on.
2. “Maitreya, the true reality of all these very phenomena conducive to
affliction and purification is the nature of things itself. It has seven
aspects:205 (i) the true reality of arising in the sense that all conditioned
phenomena are without beginning and end; (ii) the true reality of defining
characteristics in the sense that everything, person or phenomenon, is
without a self; (iii) the true reality of representations in the sense that all
conditioned phenomena are mere representations;206 (iv) the true reality of
existence in the sense of the truth of suffering that I have taught; (v) the true
reality of mistaken action207 in the sense of the truth of the origin of suffering
that I have taught; (vi) the true reality of purification in the sense of the truth
of cessation [of suffering] that I have taught; (vii) the true reality of correct
action in the sense of the truth of the path that I have taught.
“Maitreya, on

account

of the

true

reality

of arising, defining

characteristics, and existence, all beings are similar and equal. Maitreya, on
account of the true reality of defining characteristics and representations, all
phenomena are similar and equal. Maitreya, on account of the true reality of
purification, the awakening of the hearers, the awakening of the solitary
realizers, and the unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening are similar
and equal. Maitreya, on account of the true reality of correct action, similar
and equal too are the wisdoms encompassed by the mental stillness and
insight that take as a referential object a universal teaching that has been
heard, contemplated, and practiced.208 [F.31.a]
3. “Maitreya, the apprehending subject consists in the phenomena of the
five physical sense domains, mind, thought, cognition, and mental states.
4. “Maitreya, the apprehended object consists in the six external sense
domains. In addition, Maitreya, apprehending subjects are also apprehended
objects.
5. “Maitreya, the objects corresponding to abodes are the worlds of beings,
which manifest wherever there are beings: as one, one hundred, one
thousand, or one hundred thousand villages; as one, one hundred, one
thousand, or one hundred thousand continents; as one, one hundred, one

thousand, or one hundred thousand great continents of Jambudvīpa; as one,
one hundred, one thousand, or one hundred thousand times the four great
continents; as one, one hundred, one thousand, or one hundred thousand
universes of a thousand worlds; as one, one hundred, one thousand, or one
hundred thousand bichiliocosms; as one, one hundred, one thousand, one
hundred thousand, ten million, one billion, ten billion, one hundred billion,
or ten trillion trichiliocosms; as one, one hundred, one thousand, one
hundred thousand times an incalculable number of them; or as many as the
number of atoms present in one hundred thousand times an incalculable
number of trichiliocosms.
6. “Maitreya, I have taught that objects of enjoyment are the assets and
belongings owned by beings for the sake of their enjoyment.
7. “Maitreya, a wrong view is a mistaken conception, thought, or view
conceiving the impermanent as permanent, suffering as happiness, impurity
as purity, or selflessness as self with regard to notions such as an
apprehending subject. [F.31.b]
8. “Maitreya, a correct view, being the opposite of a wrong view, is its
antidote.
9. “Maitreya, the object conducive to affliction is of three kinds: the object
conducive to the affliction comprising the defilements of the three worlds, to
the affliction of karma, and to the affliction of arising.
10. “Maitreya, the object conducive to purification consists of all that is in
harmony with awakening on account of being free indeed from the three
sorts of affliction.
“Maitreya, you should know that all objects of designation are included in
these ten points.
8.21

“Moreover, Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of these objects of
designation comprises five items. What are they? They are the topics to be
comprehended,

the

objects

of

designation

to

be

comprehended,

comprehension, the result of comprehension, and the communication of this
result.
1. “Maitreya, the topics to be comprehended consist of anything that is
knowable or perceptible, such as what is referred to as the aggregates, the
internal and external sense domains, and so forth.
2. “Maitreya, the objects of designation to be comprehended consist of [all]
cognitive objects, however diverse they appear and as they really are: the
conventional and the ultimate; shortcomings and qualities; conditions and
time; the defining characteristics of arising, abiding, and disintegrating;
sickness, old age, and death; suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation
of suffering, and the path leading to the cessation of suffering; true reality,
the ultimate limit of existence, and the domain of truth; condensed and

detailed teachings; categorical, analytical, interrogative, and dismissive
answers; and secret instructions and proclamations. You should know that
these are the objects of designation to be comprehended.
3. “Maitreya, comprehension is grasping both [F.32.a] the topics and the
objects of designation to be comprehended, any factor that is in harmony
with awakening, such as the applications of mindfulness, the correct selfrestraints, and so forth.
4. “Maitreya, the result of comprehension consists of disciplining and
completely eliminating desire, anger, and delusion, as well as in actualizing
the results of the path of the recluse together with the virtuous qualities of
the

hearers

and

tathāgatas

I

have

described

as

mundane

and

supramundane, ordinary and extraordinary.
5. “Maitreya, communicating this result consists in revealing what brings
about liberation209 on the basis of210 the very teachings one has actualized,
as well as in propagating these teaching for the sake of others.211
“Maitreya, you should know that all objects are subsumed within these
five points.
8.22

“Maitreya, the bodhisattvas’ analytical knowledge of the objects of
designation includes four topics. What are they? They are mental
appropriation, experience, affliction, and purification. Maitreya, you should
know that all the objects of designation are also included within these four
topics.

8.23

“Maitreya, the bodhisattvas’ analytical knowledge of the objects of
designation is also presented according to three topics. What are they? They
are letters, meanings, and contexts.
1. “Maitreya, you should understand the letters as forming collections of
names.
2. “Maitreya, meanings comprise ten aspects: the defining characteristic of
true reality, the defining characteristic of comprehension, the defining
characteristic of abandonment, the defining characteristic of realization, the
defining characteristic of practice, the defining characteristic consisting of
these very five defining characteristics, the defining characteristic of the
relation between the support and the supported, [F.32.b] the defining
characteristic of the phenomena undermining comprehension and so forth,
the

defining

characteristic

of

the

phenomena

in

harmony

with

comprehension, and the defining characteristic of the benefits and
shortcomings resulting respectively from having comprehension or not.
3. “Maitreya, there are five contexts: the context of the surrounding
universe, the context of beings, the context of Dharma, the context of
discipline, and the context of methods of discipline.

“Maitreya, you should know that all objects of designation are also
included within these three topics.”
8.24

“Blessed One, what differences are made between the comprehension of
the objects of designation that is produced by the wisdom arising from
hearing the Dharma, the comprehension of the objects of designation that is
produced by the wisdom arising from contemplating the Dharma, and the
comprehension of the objects of designation that is produced by the wisdom
arising from practicing mental stillness and insight?”
“Maitreya, through the wisdom arising from hearing the Dharma, the
bodhisattvas rely on the literal meaning of words but not on their underlying
intent, which they do not understand; although they are in harmony with
liberation, their comprehension is [limited to] the objects of designation that
do not liberate them.
“Maitreya, through the wisdom arising from contemplating the Dharma,
the bodhisattvas do not rely exclusively on the literal meaning of words but
also on the underlying intent, which they understand; although they are in
great harmony with liberation, their comprehension is [still limited to] the
objects of designation that do not liberate them.
“Maitreya, through the wisdom arising from practicing mental stillness
and insight, the bodhisattvas, relying on the literal meaning of words or not,
rely on the underlying intent, which they understand by means of an image,
an object of concentration corresponding to a cognitive object; they are in
great harmony with liberation, and their comprehension includes the objects
of designation that liberate them. Maitreya, such is the difference between
them.” [F.33.a]

8.25

“Blessed One, what is the gnosis 212 of the bodhisattvas who practice
mental stillness and insight and who comprehend designations as well as
objects of designation? What is their perception?”
“Maitreya, I have explained their gnosis 213 and perception in many ways,
but I will give you a concise explanation. Gnosis consists in the mental
stillness and insight that take a universal teaching as a referential object.
Perception consists in the mental stillness and insight that take a specific
teaching as a referential object.”

8.26

“Blessed One, as bodhisattvas practice mental stillness and insight, which
kinds of phenomenal appearance do they discard? How do they direct their
attention to achieve this?”
“Maitreya, they discard the phenomenal appearance of designations and
objects of designation by directing their attention on true reality. They
discard names by not taking the essence of names as a referential object and
by not paying attention to the phenomenal appearance that constitutes their
basis. You should know that just as it is with names, so it is also with words,

letters, and all objects of designation. Maitreya, they discard letters,
meanings, and contexts by not taking their essence as a referential object
and by not paying attention to the phenomenal appearance that constitutes
their basis.”214
8.27

“Blessed One, is phenomenal appearance also discarded with regard to
the analytical knowledge of the object of designation corresponding to true
reality?”
“Maitreya, if the analytical knowledge of the object of designation
corresponding to true reality does not have a phenomenal appearance and
does not take a phenomenal appearance as its referential object, then what
would be discarded in that case? Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of the
object of designation corresponding to true reality disposes of all the
phenomenal appearances of designations and objects of designation. But I
did not teach that anything at all could dispose of this analytical
knowledge.”

8.28

“Blessed One, you have explained by way of analogy that it is impossible
to discern one’s own appearance 215 in a container filled with muddy water, a
dirty mirror, or an agitated pond surface, [F.33.b] but that it is possible in a
container filled with clear water, a well-polished mirror, or a quiet pond. You
have explained that, likewise, the mind of those who do not practice cannot
know true reality exactly as it is, whereas the mind of those who do practice
can indeed. In reference to this statement, what is this mental inspection?216
What true reality do you have in mind here, and what is the meaning of this
statement?”
“Maitreya, I spoke those words in reference to the three kinds of mental
inspection: the mental inspection arising from hearing the Dharma, the
mental inspection arising from contemplating the Dharma, and the mental
inspection arising from practicing the Dharma. I taught this having in mind
the true reality of representations.”217

8.29

“Blessed One, how many kinds of phenomenal appearances did you teach
to the bodhisattvas who possess the analytical knowledge of designations
and objects of designation and who engage in eliminating phenomenal
appearances?”
“Maitreya, there are ten kinds of phenomenal appearances, and these
bodhisattvas eliminate them by means of emptiness. What are these ten?
1. “The diverse phenomenal appearances in the way of words and letters
through which designations and objects of designation are analytically
known—these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the
emptiness of all phenomena.218

2. “The phenomenal appearances corresponding to a continuum of
arisings and cessations or abidings and transformations through which the
object designated as the true reality of existence is analytically known—
these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of
defining characteristic and by the emptiness of what is without beginning
and end.
3. “The phenomenal appearances resulting from the belief in a perduring
self or the thought, ‘I am,’ through which the object designated as the
apprehending

subject

is

analytically

known—these

phenomenal

appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of the inner subject
and the emptiness of what is not taken as a referential object.219
4. “The phenomenal appearances resulting from the belief in objects of
enjoyment through which the object designated as the apprehended object
is analytically known—these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by
means of the emptiness of the outer object.220
5. “The phenomenal appearances of pleasure within the inner subject and
of beauty regarding the outer object through which courtesans 221 and
possessions are analytically known as objects of enjoyment—these
phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of the
outer object and the emptiness of essence. [F.34.a]
6. “The innumerable phenomenal appearances through which objects of
designation corresponding to states of existence are analytically known—
these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the great
emptiness.
7. “With formlessness as a support, the phenomenal appearances of the
liberation brought about by inner peace are analytically known—these
phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of
conditioned phenomena.
8. “The phenomenal appearance of the selflessness of persons and
phenomena, the phenomenal appearance of what is merely a representation,
and the phenomenal appearance of the ultimate through which the object of
designation corresponding to the true reality of defining characteristics is
analytically known—these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by
means of the emptiness of the limitless, the emptiness of the substanceless,
the emptiness of essence of the substanceless, and the emptiness of the
ultimate.
9. “The phenomenal appearances of what is unconditioned and
changeless through which the object of designation corresponding to the
true reality leading

to purification222 is

analytically known—these

phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of the
unconditioned and the emptiness devoid of rejection.

10. “The phenomenal appearances of emptiness resulting from directing
one’s attention toward this very emptiness as an antidote to phenomenal
appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of emptiness.”
8.30

“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas

eliminate these ten kinds

of

phenomenal appearances, which phenomenal appearances do they
eliminate and from which binding phenomenal appearances will they be
free?”
“Maitreya, by eliminating the object of concentration, the phenomenal
appearance corresponding to an image,223 bodhisattvas will be free from
phenomenal appearances consisting in the phenomenal appearances of
affliction, which they will also eliminate.
“Maitreya, you should know that these various kinds of emptiness are the
direct antidotes to these various kinds of phenomenal appearance. But it is
not the case that each of them is not an antidote to all phenomenal
appearances. Maitreya, it is like this: ignorance does not [directly] bring
about all afflictions up to old age and death [with regard to the twelve
factors of conditioned existence]. Yet, because it is indeed the closely or very
closely related condition [for their arising, it does bring them about
indirectly]. This is why it is taught that ignorance directly brings about
conditioning mental factors. You should consider the present topic in the
same way. [F.34.b]
8.31

“Blessed One, what is it that bodhisattvas realize in the context of the
Great Vehicle? What is then inherent to the defining characteristic of
emptiness that causes bodhisattvas to not deviate from it because of pride?”
Then, the Blessed One said, “Excellent, Maitreya. You question the
Tathāgata on this point so that bodhisattvas will not deviate from emptiness.
This is excellent indeed. Why? Because, Maitreya, bodhisattvas who deviate
from emptiness will also deviate from the entire Great Vehicle. Therefore,
listen well, Maitreya, and I will explain to you what is inherent to the
defining characteristic of emptiness.
“Maitreya, emptiness as taught in the Great Vehicle means that the otherdependent and actual defining characteristics are completely devoid of the
imaginary defining characteristic of affliction and purification and that
bodhisattvas do not take this imaginary defining characteristic as a
referential object.”224

8.32

“Blessed One, how many types of concentration are included within
mental stillness and insight?”
“Maitreya, you should know that they include all the types of
concentration of the hearers, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas that I have
taught.”
“Blessed One, from which causes do mental stillness and insight arise?”

“Maitreya, they arise from a pure discipline and a pure view resulting from
hearing and contemplating [the Dharma] as their causes.”
“Blessed One, please explain what their results are.”
“Maitreya, a pure mind and a pure wisdom are their results. You should
know that all mundane and supramundane virtuous qualities of the hearers,
the bodhisattvas, and the tathāgatas are also their results.” [F.35.a]
“Blessed One, what is the activity of mental stillness and insight?”
“Maitreya, they liberate one from the two kinds of bonds: the bonds of
phenomenal appearance and the bonds of corruption.”
8.33

“Blessed One, among the five obstacles mentioned by the Blessed One,
which are obstacles to mental stillness, which are obstacles to insight, and
which are obstacles to both?”
“Maitreya, caring 225 about the body and objects of enjoyment is an
obstacle to mental stillness. Not obtaining instructions from noble beings as
desired is an obstacle to insight. Living in a state of confusion and being
content with bare necessities are obstacles to both.226 On account of the first
of these, one will not exert oneself. On account of the second, one will not
exert oneself through to the completion of practice.”
“Blessed One, among the five obstructions mentioned by the Blessed One,
which are obstructions to mental stillness, which are obstructions to insight,
and which are obstructions to both?”
“Maitreya, agitation and remorse are obstructions to mental stillness.
Laziness, lethargy, and doubts are obstructions to insight. Craving for
desired objects and malicious thoughts are obstructions to both.”
“Blessed One, when is the path of mental stillness purified?”
“At the time when agitation and remorse have been conquered.”
“Blessed One, when is the path of insight purified?”
“At the

time

when

laziness, lethargy, and doubts

have

been

conquered.”227
8.34

“Blessed One, how many kinds of mental distractions will bodhisattvas
engaged in mental stillness and insight experience?”
“Maitreya, they will experience five kinds of mental distractions: the
mental distraction with regard to the way one directs one’s attention, the
mental distraction with regard to outer objects, the mental distraction with
regard to the inner subject, the mental distraction produced by phenomenal
appearances, [F.35.b] and the mental distraction resulting from corruption.
1. “Maitreya, if bodhisattvas forsake the way attention is directed in the
Great Vehicle 228 and fall into the way hearers and solitary realizers direct
their attention, then this is mental distraction regarding the way one directs
one’s attention.

2. “If bodhisattvas let their minds wander among the five external objects
of desire, entertainments, phenomenal appearances, conceptualizations,
defilements, secondary defilements, and external referential objects, then
this is mental distraction with regard to outer objects.
3. “If bodhisattvas sink into laziness and lethargy, experience the taste of
absorption, or become stained by any secondary defilement related to
absorption, then this is mental distraction with regard to the inner subject.
4. “If bodhisattvas direct their attention toward the phenomenal
appearance that is the inner subject’s object of concentration by relying upon
the phenomenal appearances of outer objects, then this is mental distraction
produced by phenomenal appearances.
5. “If bodhisattvas become conceited by identifying themselves with the
body afflicted by corruption with regard to sensations arising in the course
of directing the inner subject’s attention, this is mental distraction ensuing
from corruption.”
8.35

“Blessed One, for which obstacles do mental stillness and insight serve as
antidotes from the first stage of the bodhisattva path up to the stage of a
tathāgata?”
1. “Maitreya, on the first stage, mental stillness and insight are antidotes to
the defilement of bad destinies as well as to the affliction of karma and birth.
2. “On the second stage, they are antidotes to the arising of confusion
resulting from subtle transgressions.
3. “On the third stage, they are antidotes to attachment for desirous
objects.
4. “On the fourth stage, they are antidotes to craving for absorption and
Dharma.
5. “On the fifth stage, they are antidotes to the exclusive rejection of
saṃsāra and exclusive inclination toward nirvāṇa.
6. ‘On the sixth stage, they are antidotes to the abundant arising of
phenomenal appearances.
7. “On the seventh stage, they are antidotes to the subtle arising of
phenomenal appearances.
8. “On the eighth, they are antidotes to exerting oneself toward what is
without phenomenal appearance as well as to not having mastery over
phenomenal appearances.
9. On the ninth, they are antidotes to not having mastery in teaching the
Dharma in every aspect. [F.36.a]
10. “On the tenth, they are antidotes to not having obtained the perfect
analytical knowledge of the truth body.

11. “Maitreya, on the stage of a tathāgata, mental stillness and insight are
antidotes to the extremely subtle defiling obstructions and the even more
subtle cognitive obstructions.229 By fully eliminating these obstructions, one
abides within the truth body that has been completely purified. As a
consequence, one obtains the realization of the object corresponding to the
accomplishment of the goal—the gnosis and vision that are utterly free from
attachment and hindrance.”230
8.36

“Blessed One, in what way do bodhisattvas obtain mental stillness and
insight, so that they will attain the unsurpassable complete and perfect
awakening?”231
“Maitreya, once bodhisattvas have obtained mental stillness and insight,
they consider the seven aspects of true reality.232 With their minds
concentrated on the doctrine that has been heard and contemplated, they
direct their attention inwardly toward the true reality that has been well233
understood, contemplated, and focused upon. As they direct their attention
in this way on true reality, their minds then remain in complete
equanimity234 toward each and every subtle phenomenal appearance that
manifests, not to mention coarse ones.
“Maitreya, these subtle phenomenal appearances include the phenomenal
appearances appropriated by mind; the phenomenal appearances of
experiences, representations, affliction, and purification; the internal or
external phenomenal appearances and those that are both internal and
external; the phenomenal appearances related to the notion that one must
act for the benefit of all beings; the phenomenal appearances of knowledge
and suchness; the phenomenal appearances of the four noble truths of
suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path;235
the phenomenal appearances of the conditioned, the unconditioned, the
permanent, the impermanent, and the nature inherent to what is subject to
suffering and change [F.36.b] or what is not subject to change; the
phenomenal

appearance

distinct

or

indistinct

from

the

defining

characteristic specific to the conditioned; the phenomenal appearance of
everything as a result of having the notion of ‘everything’ in reference to
anything; and the phenomenal appearance of the selflessness of the person
and of phenomena. The bodhisattva’s mind remains in complete equanimity
toward all these phenomenal appearances as they manifest.
“Continually practicing in this way, they will in due time purify their
minds from obstacles, obstructions, and distractions. In the course of this
practice, the seven aspects of the cognition that is personal and intuitive, the
gnosis 236 that is the awakening 237 to the seven aspects of true reality, will
arise. Such is the bodhisattvas’ path of seeing. By obtaining it, bodhisattvas
have entered the faultless state of truth,238 are born into the lineage of

tathāgatas, and, upon obtaining the first stage, enjoy all the advantages of
this stage. Because they have already obtained mental stillness and insight,
they have

attained their two referential objects: the

image

with

conceptualization and the image without conceptualization. Thus, having
obtained the path of seeing, they attain the point where phenomena end.239
“In the higher stages, they enter the path of practice and direct their
attention toward their threefold referential object.240 It is like this: in the way
one uses a smaller wedge to pull out a larger one and thus drives out a
wedge by means of a wedge, they eliminate all phenomenal appearances
related to affliction by eliminating internal phenomenal appearances. When
they eliminate them, they also eliminate corruption. By getting rid of
phenomenal appearance and corruption, they gradually purify their minds
in the higher stages in the way gold is refined. They will attain the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening and also obtain the
realization of the object corresponding to the accomplishment of the goal.241
Thus, Maitreya, [F.37.a] once bodhisattvas have achieved mental stillness
and insight in this way, they will attain the unsurpassable, complete and
perfect awakening.”
8.37

“How do bodhisattvas practice so that they accomplish the great powers
of a bodhisattva?”
“Maitreya, the bodhisattvas who are skillful with regard to these six topics
accomplish the great powers of a bodhisattva: (1) the arising of the mind, (2)
the underlying condition of the mind, (3) the emergence from the mind, (4)
the increase of the mind, (5) the decrease of the mind, (6) and skillful means.
1. “How are they skillful with regard to the arising of the mind? They are
skillful with regard to the arising of the mind as it is if they know the sixteen
ways in which mind arises:242 (i) the representation that is a support and
receptacle, for example, the appropriating cognition;243 (ii) the representation
that is a variegated image of a referential object, for example, the mental
cognition of conceptualizations that simultaneously apprehends forms and
so on, or that simultaneously apprehends outer and inner objects, or that in a
single instant simultaneously settles in several states of concentration,
perceives numerous buddha fields, or sees many tathāgatas —being nothing
but the mental cognition of conceptualizations; (iii) the representation taking
limited phenomenal appearances as its object, for example, the mind related
to the [realm of] desire; (iv) the representation taking vast phenomenal
appearances as its object, for example, the mind related to the [realm of]
form; (v) the representation taking immeasurable phenomenal appearances
as its object, for example, the mind related to the domain of limitless space
and limitless cognition; (vi) the representation taking subtle phenomenal
appearances as its object, for example, the mind related to the domain of

nothingness;

(vii)

the

representation

taking

ultimate

phenomenal

appearances as its object, for example, the mind related to the domain of
neither conception nor lack of conception; (viii) the representation that does
not have phenomenal appearance [as its object], for example, the
supramundane mind and the mind having cessation as its object; [F.37.b] (ix)
the representation involving suffering, for example, the mind of hell beings;
(x) the representation involving mixed sensations, for example, the mind
experienced in the [realm of] desire; (xi) the representation involving joy, for
example, the mind belonging to the first and second meditative absorptions;
(xii) the representation involving bliss, for example, the mind belonging to
the third meditative absorption; (xiii) the representation involving neither
suffering nor bliss, for example, the mind belonging to the fourth meditative
absorption up to the domain of neither conception nor lack of conception;
(xiv) the representation involving defilements, for example, the mind
associated

with

defilements

and

secondary

defilements;

(xv)

the

representation involving virtue, for example, the mind associated with faith
and so on; and (xvi) the neutral representation, for example, the mind that is
not associated with either defilement or virtue.
2. “How are they skillful with regard to the underlying condition of the
mind? They are skillful when they cognize the true reality of representations
as it truly is.244
3. “How are they skillful with regard to the emergence from the mind?
They are skillful when they cognize as they truly are the two bonds, namely,
the bonds of phenomenal appearance and corruption.
4. “How are they skillful with regard to the increase of the mind? They are
skillful when they cognize as such the arising and increase of the mind at the
moment when the mind that is the antidote to phenomenal appearance and
corruption arises and increases.
5. “How are they skillful with regard to the decrease of the mind? They are
skillful when they cognize as such the decrease and decline of the mind at
the moment when the mind afflicted by the adverse factors of phenomenal
appearance and corruption decreases and declines.
6. “How are they skilled in terms of means? They are skillful when they
practice the eight liberations, the eight domains of mastery, and the ten
domains of totality.
“Maitreya, in this way bodhisattvas have accomplished, do accomplish,
and will accomplish the great powers of a bodhisattva. [F.38.a]”
8.38

“The Blessed One said that all sensations have come to complete cessation
in the domain of the nirvāṇa with no aggregates remaining. What are then
those sensations?”245

“Maitreya, in brief, two kinds of sensations cease: (1) the sensations 246
arising from corruption incumbent on being alive and (2) the sensations
arising from their resulting objects.
1. “Among those, the sensations arising from corruption related to one’s
existence are of four kinds: (i) sensations arising from physical corruption,
(ii) sensations arising from nonphysical corruption, (iii) sensations arising
from corruption currently brought to fruition, and (iv) sensations arising
from corruption not yet brought to fruition.
“Sensations arising from corruption brought to fruition refer to present
sensations, whereas sensations arising from sensations not yet brought to
fruition refer to sensations that are the causes for future sensations.
2. “The sensations of their resulting objects are also of four kinds: (i)
sensations related to places, (ii) sensations related to necessities, (iii)
sensations related to enjoyments, and (iv) sensations related to relations.
“Moreover, there are sensations in the domain of the nirvāṇa with
aggregates remaining. Although these include sensations not yet brought to
fruition,247 their opposites, the experience of sensations arising from present
sensations, have not completely ceased. They are experienced as a mixture of
pleasant and unpleasant sensations. Both kinds of sensation already brought
to fruition have completely ceased. Only the category of sensations arising
from present sensations are experienced. In the domain of the nirvāṇa with
no aggregates remaining, even this will cease when one passes into
parinirvāṇa. This is why I said that all sensations have come to a complete
cessation in the domain of the nirvāṇa with no aggregates remaining.”
8.39

Thereupon, the Blessed One spoke these words to the bodhisattva
Maitreya: “Maitreya, you questioned the Tathāgata with determination and
skill regarding the perfect and pure path of yoga. This is excellent. I taught
that this path of yoga is perfect and pure, and exactly248 so I have [F.38.b]
taught and will teach all the perfect buddhas of the past and the future. The
sons and daughters of noble family should devote themselves to this path
with great effort.”249

8.40

Then, at that moment,250 the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“This presentation of the teachings by means of designations
Is thoughtful and of great significance for [the practice of this] yoga.251
Those who, by relying on this Dharma,
Correctly devote themselves to this yoga will attain awakening.252
“Those who, seeking liberation, study the entire Dharma
By looking for faults and disputing it
Are, Maitreya, as far from this yoga
As is the sky from the earth.253

“Wise 254 and skilled in the real meaning 255 of benefiting beings
Is the one who does not strive to benefit beings thinking they will reward
him.256
The one expecting a reward will indeed257 not obtain
The joy that is both258 supreme and free from covetousness.259
“Those who grant Dharma instructions [to obtain] desirous objects
Have renounced desirous objects and yet260 still accept them.
Although these fools have obtained the priceless and faultless 261 jewel of
Dharma,
They wander like beggars.262
“Therefore, with great effort
Strive to abandon disputation, distractions, and mental elaborations.
In order to liberate the world of beings including the gods,
Devote yourself to this yoga.”
8.41

Then, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One, what
is the name of the teaching imparted in this Dharma discourse that unravels
the Tathāgata’s intent? How should I keep it in mind?”263
The Blessed One answered, “Maitreya, this is a teaching of definitive
meaning on yoga. Keep it in mind as The Teaching of Definitive Meaning on
Yoga.” As the Blessed One expounded this teaching, six hundred thousand
beings produced the mind directed at the unsurpassable, complete and
perfect awakening, three hundred thousand hearers [F.39.a] purified the
Dharma eye from impurities and contaminations; one hundred and fifty
hearers who were without attachment liberated their minds from all
outflows; and seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas attained the state wherein
their attention was directed toward the great yoga.264
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Maitreya—the eighth chapter.

9.

