CHAPTER 10

10.1

Then the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī addressed the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
when you mention ‘the truth body of the tathāgatas,’ what is the defining
characteristic of this truth body of the tathāgatas?”
The Blessed One answered, “Mañjuśrī, the truth body of the tathāgatas is
characterized when one has fully achieved a shift in one’s basis of existence,
the emergence [from cyclic existence] through the practice of the stages and
the perfections.308 Because of the two [following] reasons, you should know
that this truth body is characterized by inconceivability: (1) it is beyond
mental elaborations and is not produced by intentional action,309 (2) while
beings are fixated on mental elaborations and produced by intentional
action.”

10.2

“Blessed One, is the shift in the hearers’ and solitary realizers’ basis of
existence also designated as the truth body?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is not.”
“Blessed One, how should it be called?”
“Mañjuśrī, it should be called the liberation body.310 With regard to the
liberation body, the tathāgatas are similar and equal to the hearers and
solitary realizers, but, on account of the truth body, they are distinctively
superior to them. This being so, they are also distinctively superior to them
in terms of the distinctively immeasurable aspect of their positive qualities.
This is not easy to illustrate with examples.”

10.3

“Blessed One, how should we consider those who have the characteristic
of manifesting themselves through the birth of a tathāgata?”
“Mañjuśrī, those who have the characteristic of the emanation body311
resemble those who manifest in the world realms. You should see them as
those whose characteristic is to be established by the sovereign power312 of
the buddhas, being fully adorned with the ornaments of the tathāgatas’
qualities. The truth body does not have this manifestation of arising.”

10.4

“Blessed One, how should we consider the skillful means employed by
the emanation body [for the sake of liberating beings from cyclic
existence]?”313 [F.49.b]
“Mañjuśrī, being conceived in a family renowned to be powerful or
honorable in all the buddha fields of the trichiliocosm, taking birth, growing
up, enjoying desirous objects, leaving home, displaying immediately the
practice of austerities, renouncing them, and displaying all the stages of the
complete and perfect awakening should be considered as the skillful means
of the emanation body.”
“Blessed One, through which teachings emanating from their sovereign
power do the tathāgatas bring to maturity those spiritually immature beings
who have been converted? How do they liberate spiritually mature beings
by means of the very referential object [taught in the Great Vehicle]?”
“Mañjuśrī, they bring them to maturity through three teachings: the
sūtras, the Vinaya, and the mātṛkās.”

10.5

“Blessed One, what are the sūtras, the Vinaya, and the mātṛkās?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is like this: sūtras are teachings that gather the subject matter
of various Dharma methods in four, nine, or twenty-nine topics.
1. “What are the four topics? They are (i) what was heard, (ii) taking
refuge, (iii) the training, and (iv) the awakening.
2. “What are the nine topics? They are (i) concepts of sentient beings, (ii)
their possessions, (iii) their birth, (iv) their existence after birth, (v) their
affliction and purification, (vi) their diversity, (vii) the teacher, (viii) the
teaching, and (ix) the assembly.
3. “What are the twenty-nine topics? They are the topics related to
affliction: (i) [the phenomena] included in the conditioned, (ii) their
progressive activity, (iii) the cause of their arising in future lives once they
have been conceptualized as a person, and (iv) the cause of their arising in
future lives once they have been conceptualized as phenomena.
“They are also the topics related to purification: [F.50.a] (v) the referential
objects that are taken as reference points;314 (vi) the exertion in [the practice
of] these very [objects]; (vii) mental abiding;315 (viii) blissful abiding in this
very life; (ix) the referential objects that liberate from all suffering; (x) the
three kinds of comprehension, which are the comprehension of the basis of
error, the comprehension of the basis of error with respect to beings’
conceptions for nonpractitioners, and the comprehension of the basis of
humility for those who practice Dharma; (xi) the basis of practice; (xii) the
actualization [of practice];316 (xiii) the practice; (xiv) [the practice] as the
central activity; (xv) its aspects; (xvi) its referential objects; (xvii) the skills in
the investigation of what has already been eliminated and what not yet been
eliminated; (xviii) [the factors] that are distractions from practice; (xix) [the

factors] that are not distractions from practice; (xx) the source of
nondistraction; (xxi) the yoga of clear mindfulness 317 that is protected by318
the practice; (xxii) the benefit of practice; (xxiii) its stability; (xiv) the
unification with the lord of the noble [practice]; (xv) the unification with its
retinue and entourage; (xxvi) the realization of true reality; (xxvii) the
attainment of nirvāṇa; (xxviii) the fact that the well-expounded Dharma and
Vinaya are superior to the correct views of mundane beings and all
nonpractitioners; and (xxix) the impairments resulting from not practicing.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, without practicing the well-expounded Dharma and Vinaya,
impairments will ensue, and this is not because one has faulty views.
10.6

“Mañjuśrī, the Vinaya is my teaching on prātimokṣa for hearers and
bodhisattvas, as well as that which is associated with it.” [F.50.b]
“Blessed One, how many topics are included in [the teaching on the]
prātimokṣa of bodhisattvas?”
“Mañjuśrī, there are seven topics: (1) the teachings on the ceremony of
taking [the vows of the bodhisattva discipline], (2) the teachings on the basis
of serious downfalls,319 (3) the teachings on the basis of transgressions, (4)
the teachings on the nature of transgressions, (5) the teachings on the nature
of what are not transgressions, (6) the teachings on the emergence from
transgressions, and (7) the teachings on the abandonment of the vows.

10.7

“Mañjuśrī, the mātṛkās are the teachings that I imparted and categorized
into eleven topics. What are these eleven topics? They are (1) the defining
characteristic of the conventional, (2) the defining characteristic of the
ultimate, (3) the defining characteristic of referential objects consisting of the
awakening factors, (4) the defining characteristic of their features; (5) the
defining characteristic of the[ir] nature, (6) the defining characteristic of their
result, (7) the defining characteristic of the description of the experience of
them, (8) the defining characteristic of the factors disrupting them,320 (9) the
defining characteristic of the factors conducive to them, (10) the defining
characteristic of the defects related to them, and (11) the defining
characteristic of their benefit.
1. “Mañjuśrī, consider that the defining characteristic of the conventional
has three subtopics: (1) the teaching on persons, (2) the teaching on the
imaginary nature, and (3) the teaching on the activity, movement, and action
of phenomena.
2. “Consider the defining characteristic of the ultimate in terms of the
teaching on the seven aspects of true reality.321
3. “Consider the defining characteristic of referential objects in terms of the
teaching on all the things corresponding to cognitive objects.

4. “Consider the defining characteristic of [their] features in terms of the
teaching on the eight features of the analysis of cognitive objects. What are
these eight? They are (i) the truth of cognitive objects, (ii) their
determination,322 (iii) their faults, (iv) their positive qualities, (v) the methods
for analyzing, (vi) the processes related to them, (vii) the principles of reason,
and (viii) the condensed and extensive presentations of cognitive objects.
i. “With respect to these eight points, the truth of cognitive objects is true
reality.
ii. “The determination of cognitive objects consists in establishing the
person or the imaginary essence [F.51.a] or in establishing categorical,
analytical, interrogative, and dismissive answers as well as secret
instructions.323
iii. “The faults of cognitive objects are the defects of phenomena related to
affliction, which I have taught in several ways.
iv. “The positive qualities of cognitive objects are the benefits arising from
phenomena related to purification, which I have taught in several ways.
v. “The methods for analyzing cognitive objects includes six points: (a) the
method for analyzing the meaning of true reality; (b) the method for
analyzing attainments; (c) the method for analyzing explanations; (d) the
method for analyzing the elimination of the two extremes; (e) the method for
analyzing the inconceivable; and (f) the method for analyzing the underlying
intention.
vi. “The processes related to cognitive objects are the three times, the three
defining characteristics of the conditioned, and the four conditions.
vii. “There are four principles of reason in the analysis of cognitive objects:
(a) the principle of reason based on dependence, (b) the principle of reason
based on cause and effect, (c) the principle of reason based on logical proof,
and (d) the principle of reason based on the nature of phenomena itself.
a. “The arising of conditioned phenomena and the causes for their being
expressed through conventions, as well as related causal conditions,
constitute the principle of reason based on dependence.
b. “The causes that will bring about a result,324 a completion, or an action
once phenomena have arisen, as well as related causal conditions, constitute
the principle of reason based on cause and effect.
c. “The causes establishing the meaning and bringing about the valid
understanding of the thesis,325 the demonstration, and the statement of a
proof, as well as related causal conditions, constitute the principle of reason
based on logical proof.326 This logical proof is, moreover, of two kinds: valid
and invalid. Among these, five are characterized as valid327 and seven as
invalid. What are the five logical proofs characterized as valid? They are the
logical proofs characterized by (I) a perception that is a direct cognition of

the thing to establish,328 (II) a perception that is a direct cognition of
something existing in dependence on the thing to establish,329 (III) a
demonstration through an instance belonging to the same class,330 [F.51.b]
(IV) an actual demonstration, and (V) a citation from a valid scripture.331
“With regard to those five logical proofs:
I. “The logical proof characterized by the perception that is a direct
cognition of the thing to establish consists [for example] in perceiving
through a direct cognition that all conditioned phenomena are impermanent,
suffering, and without a self as well as anything conforming to this.332
II. “The logical proof characterized by a direct cognition of something
existing in dependence on the thing to establish consists in inferring
something not directly perceptible by means of something 333 [directly
perceptible], as well as in anything conforming to this, [for example], (A) the
perception as a direct cognition of the principle of impermanence that exists
in dependence on the things to establish, [namely,] the momentariness of all
conditioned phenomena, the existence of a next life, and the consequence of
good and bad deeds;334 (B) the perception as direct cognition of the diversity
of beings that exists in dependence on the thing to establish, [namely,] the
diversity of karma; or (C) the direct cognition of the happiness and suffering
of beings that exists in dependence on the things to establish, [namely,]
virtue and nonvirtue].335
III. “You should know that the logical proof characterized by a
demonstration through an instance belonging to the same class of
phenomena336 consists in anything conforming to this, [for example] in the
demonstration of external and internal conditioned phenomena through (A)
the perception of death and rebirth, being born and other forms of
suffering,337 and causal dependence,338 which are established as facts in all
worlds or (B) the perception of wealth and misery, which are established as
facts in all worlds, including those of future lives.339
IV. “Thus, you should know that a logical proof characterized by one of
the three proofs mentioned above 340 is an actual demonstration because it is
conclusive with respect to the thing that must be established.
V. “Mañjuśrī, you should know that the logical proof characterized by a
citation from a valid scripture consists in the words taught by quoting the
omniscient ones, such as ‘Nirvāṇa is peace’ and other similar statements.
[F.52.a]
“Therefore, on account of these five kinds of characteristics, an analysis of
cognitive objects founded on the principle of reason based on logical proof is
valid.341 Because such an analysis is valid, you should rely on it.”
“Blessed One, how many qualities do those we should consider as having
the defining characteristics of the omniscient tathāgatas have?”

“Mañjuśrī, they have five qualities: (A) wherever they manifest, they are
renowned in this world for their omniscience; (B) they have the thirty-two
marks of a great being; (C) by means of their ten powers, they eliminate all
qualms affecting beings; (D) the words of the Dharma they teach through the
four kinds of assurance cannot be refuted or disputed by any opponent; (E)
on the basis of their Dharma and Vinaya, the eightfold noble path as well as
the four noble truths manifest for those who have renounced cyclic
existence.342 Thus, you should know that their manifestation, marks,
elimination of doubts, freedom from refutations and disputes, and support
[for those who have renounced cyclic existence] constitute the defining
characteristic of the omniscient tathāgatas.
“Thus, the principle of reason based on logical proof is valid on account of
the five characteristics included within these valid cognitions: direct
cognitions, inferences, and authoritative scriptures.343
“What are the seven logical proofs characterized as invalid? They are the
logical proofs characterized by (I) a perception that conforms with
something other than the thing to be established,344 (II) a perception that
does not conform with anything other than the thing to establish,345 (III) a
perception that conforms with all things,346 (IV) a perception that does not
conform with anything,347 (V) a demonstration through an instance
belonging to a different class of phenomena,348 (VI) a demonstration that is
not actually demonstrating anything, and (VII) a citation drawn from an
invalid scripture.
“The logical proof characterized by a perception that does not conform
with anything 349 is ascertained when the defining characteristics of the
proof and the premise do not conform with one another because they are
incompatible in terms of reason, essence, karma, quality, or cause and
effect.350 [F.52.b]
“Mañjuśrī, the logical proof characterized by a perception that does not
conform with anything 351 is comprised by the logical proof characterized by
a perception that conforms with something other than the thing to be
established352 and similar instances. This proof is therefore inconclusive with
respect to the thing to establish.353 This is called an unestablished logical
proof.354
“Moreover, the logical proof characterized by a perception that conforms
with all things 355 is comprised by the logical proof characterized by a
perception that does not conform with anything other than the thing to
establish356 and similar instances. This proof is therefore inconclusive with
respect to the thing to establish. This is also called an unestablished logical
proof.357

“Because these logical proofs are not established, the analysis is invalid
according to the principle of reason based on logical proof. Since this
analysis is invalid, you should not rely on it. You should know that the
logical proof characterized by a citation from an invalid scripture is invalid
by nature.
d. “Whether tathāgatas manifest or not, the constancy of the domain of
truth, the nature of phenomena, on account of the constancy of phenomena,
constitutes the principle of reason based on the nature of phenomena.358
viii. “The condensed and the extensive presentation of cognitive objects
consists of first summarizing, then analyzing words and sections of the
teaching, and finally concluding the explanation.
5. “The defining characteristic of the nature of awakening factors consists
in the apprehension of a referential object together with its aspects, as I have
taught, such as the awakening factors, the four applications of mindfulness,
and so on.
6. “The defining characteristic of their result is the accomplishment of their
result, the mundane and supramundane positive qualities, by abandoning
the defilements associated with the mundane or the supramundane
phenomena.
7. “The defining characteristic of accounts telling how one experiences
them as one proclaims them, explains them, and correctly teach them to
others is the analytical knowledge of the gnosis 359 that liberates within true
reality.
8. “The defining characteristic of the factors disrupting them is the
afflicted phenomenon in the form of an obstacle to the practice of these very
awakening factors. [F.53.a]
9. “The defining characteristic of the factors conducive to them is the
phenomenon useful to [enhancing] them.
10.” The defining characteristic of defects related to them is the fault
interrupting them.
11. “Mañjuśrī, you should know that the defining characteristic of their
benefit consists in their corresponding positive qualities.”
10.8

Then, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī further said to the Blessed One, “Blessed
One, please explain the meaning of the formula through which bodhisattvas
comply with the underlying intention360 of the profound Dharma expounded
by the tathāgatas, the complete meaning of the sūtras, the Vinaya, and the
mātṛkās that is not known by those not following you.”
“Mañjuśrī, listen. I will explain to you the complete meaning of the
formula so that bodhisattvas will in this way understand my underlying
intention. Mañjuśrī, the possessors of qualities resulting from affliction and
purification361 are all without movement and without a person. This is why I

taught that all phenomena are in every respect beyond activity. It is not the
case that the possessors of qualities resulting from affliction first became
afflicted and will then become purified from these afflictions or that the
possessors of qualities resulting from purification have become purified from
afflictions they previously acquired. Thus, foolish ordinary beings rely on
views resulting from their latent dispositions, on account of which they
wrongly conceive the body afflicted by corruption as the essence of
phenomena and persons. As a consequence, reifying [the ego through
concepts such as] ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ they mistakenly conceive of the following
notions: ‘I see,’ ‘I hear,’ ‘I smell,’ ‘I taste,’ ‘I touch,’ ‘I am conscious,’ ‘I eat,’ ‘I
do,’ ‘I am afflicted,’ and ‘I am purified.’ [F.53.b]
“Thus, those who understand this fact as it really is abandon the body
afflicted by corruption and instead obtain the body that is not a support for
any defilement, being pure, free from mental elaborations, unconditioned,
and unproduced by intentional action. Mañjuśrī, you should know that this
is the complete meaning of the formula.”
Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“The possessors of qualities resulting from affliction and purification
Are all without movement362 and without a person;
Therefore, I declare them to be without activity,
As they are neither purified nor afflicted, be it in the past or the future.
“Relying on views resulting from their latent dispositions,
On account of which they wrongly conceive the body afflicted by corruption,
They reify [the ego through concepts such as] ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
As a consequence, notions arise, such as ‘I see,’ ‘I eat,’ ‘I do,’ ‘I am afflicted,’
and ‘I am purified.’
“Thus, those who understand this fact as it really is
Abandon the body afflicted by corruption
And instead will obtain a body that is not a basis for any defilement,
Being free from mental elaborations and unconditioned.”363
10.9

“Blessed One, how should we know the defining characteristic of the arising
of the tathāgatas’ mind?”
“Mañjuśrī, tathāgatas are not characterized by mind, thought, or
cognition.364 However, you should know that, similar to an emanation,365 the
tathāgatas’ mind arises in the way of something that is not produced by
intentional action.”
“Blessed One, if the truth body of the tathāgatas is not produced at all by
intentional action, how then could their mind arise without being produced
by intentional action?”366

“Mañjuśrī, their mind arises on account of a previous intentional action,
namely, the practice of skillful means and wisdom. Mañjuśrī, it is like this:
although awakening from a state of sleep in which there is no thought
ensues [spontaneously] without resulting from intentional action, [F.54.a]
one will awaken due to previous intentional actions. Although the
emergence from the absorption in the state of cessation is not produced by
intentional action, one will emerge from it merely due to previous intentional
actions. Just as the mind arises from a state of sleep or from the absorption in
the state of cessation, you should know that the tathāgatas’ mind also arises
due to previous intentional actions such as the practice of skillful means and
wisdom.”
“Blessed One, should we say that the mind emanated by tathāgatas exists
or not?”
“Mañjuśrī, [their] mind neither exists nor does not exist, because it is
causally independent and causally dependent.”367
“Blessed One, what is the sphere of activity of the tathāgatas? What is the
domain368 of the tathāgatas? Should we consider these two as distinct?”
“Mañjuśrī, the sphere of activity of the tathāgatas consists in the pure
buddha realms, the arrayed ornaments of inconceivable and boundless
positive qualities common to all tathāgatas. The domain of the tathāgatas
comprises five domains: the domain of the surrounding universe, the domain
of beings, the domain of Dharma, the domain of discipline, and the domain of
methods of discipline.369 There is a distinction between the two.”
10.10

“Blessed One, how should we understand the defining characteristic of
the tathāgatas’ complete and perfect awakening, of their turning of the
wheel of Dharma, and of their great parinirvāṇa?”
“Mañjuśrī, the tathāgatas are characterized by nonduality.370 They are
neither completely and perfectly awakened nor not completely and perfectly
awakened; [F.54.b] they neither turn the wheel of Dharma nor do not turn the
wheel of Dharma; they neither [attain] the great parinirvāṇa nor do not attain
the great parinirvāṇa. This is because the truth body is utterly pure and the
emanation body constantly manifests.”
“Blessed One, why should we consider that the merit produced by beings
on account of seeing, hearing, or serving the tathāgatas’ emanation body
arises from the tathāgatas?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is because these activities consist in taking a superior
referential object thanks to the tathāgatas, and also because the emanation
body is the tathāgatas’ sovereign power.”
“Blessed One, since this does not seem to be produced by intentional
action, why is it that the great light of gnosis manifests in beings solely
through the truth body of the tathāgatas and that innumerable emanated

reflections also manifest [as the tathāgatas’ emanation body], while this light
and its reflections do not manifest from the hearers’ and solitary realizers’
liberation body?”
“Mañjuśrī, while this does not seem to be produced by intentional action,
on account of the power of very strong beings and the force of beings’
karma, a great light manifests to beings from water and fire crystals
produced from the disks of the moon and sun. However, it does not manifest
from water and fire crystals produced from other sources. From a precious
gem that has been well polished through [intentional] action, reflections
corresponding to its engraving manifest [when it is placed before a light
source]. However, they do not manifest from another unpolished gem.
Likewise, because the truth body of the tathāgatas also is established by
having been purified through the practice of skillful means and insight
focusing on the immeasurable domain of truth, [F.55.a] the great light of
gnosis manifests in beings, and innumerable emanated reflections arise.
However, they do not manifest from the hearers’ and solitary realizers’
liberation body.”
10.11

“Blessed One, you said that, through the force of the tathāgatas’ and
bodhisattvas’ sovereign power, one can obtain an excellent body in the
realm of desire, such as that of a warrior or a brahman, a body that is like a
great sāla tree, or the excellent body of a god residing in the realm of desire,
the realm of form, or the realm of the formless. Blessed One, what was your
underlying intention with regard to this?”
“Mañjuśrī, by means of their sovereign power, tathāgatas teach as they
are the path and practices through which one obtains all these excellent
bodies. Those accomplishing these path and practices will always obtain all
these perfect bodies, while those who reject or denigrate these path and
practices, as well as those who have animosity or resentment toward them,
will always obtain all kinds of miserable bodies upon their death. Mañjuśrī,
on account of this skillful means, you should know in this way that, because
of the sovereign power of the tathāgatas, one will be reborn in a perfect body
as well as in a miserable one.”

10.12

“Blessed One, in the universes that are impure and pure, what is
abundant? What is rare?”
“Mañjuśrī, in the universes that are impure, [F.55.b] eight things are
abundant and two are rare. Abundant are (1) followers of traditions other
than mine; (2) suffering beings; (3) beings who are different in terms of
lineages, families, and communities or wealth and poverty; (4) beings
engaging into wrongdoing; (5) beings who have lost their discipline; (6)
beings in bad destinies; (7) followers of inferior vehicles; and (8)

bodhisattvas with inferior intentions and practices. Rare are (1) the actions of
bodhisattvas having superior intentions and practices and (2) the
manifestation of tathāgatas.
“Mañjuśrī, in the universes that are pure, it is the opposite of this. You
should know that these eight things are rare and these two things
abundant.”
Then, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
what is the name of the teaching imparted in this Dharma discourse that
unravels the Tathāgata’s intent? How should I keep it in mind?”
The Blessed One answered, “Mañjuśrī, this is a teaching of definitive
meaning establishing the deeds of the tathāgatas. Keep it in mind as The
Teaching of Definitive Meaning Establishing the Deeds of the Tathāgatas. As the
Blessed One expounded this teaching, seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas
obtained the perfect analytical knowledge of the truth body.
After the Blessed One had spoken these words, the prince Mañjuśrī
together with the entire retinue of gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas
rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
The [tenth chapter of the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī] called “The Chapter Establishing the
Positive Qualities [of the Tathāgatas]” of [the sūtra of] the Great Vehicle called
“Unraveling the Intent” is concluded.

ab.

ABBREVIATIONS
Bd

Bardan (Zanskar) canonical collection

C

Choné xylograph Kangyur

Cbeta

Chinese Electronic Buddhist Association, (www.cbeta.org
(http://www.cbeta.org))

Cz

Chizhi Kangyur

D

Degé xylograph Kangyur

Dd

Dodedrak Kangyur

Dk

Dongkarla Kangyur

Do

Dolpo canonical collection

F

Phukdrak manuscript Kangyur

Go

Gondhla (Lahaul) canonical collection

Gt

Gangteng Kangyur

H

Lhasa xylograph Kangyur

He

Hemis I Kangyur

J

’jang sa tham/Lithang xylograph Kangyur

Kʙ

Berlin manuscript Kangyur

Kǫ774

Peking 1737 xylograph Kangyur

L

London (Shelkar) manuscript Kangyur

Lg

Lang mdo Kangyur

Mvyut

Mahāvyutpatti

N

Narthang xylograph Kangyur

Ng

Namgyal Kangyur

Np

Neyphug Kangyur

O

Tawang Kangyur

Pj

Phajoding I Kangyur

Pz

Phajoding II Kangyur

R

Ragya Kangyur

S

Stok manuscript Kangyur

Saṃdh.

Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra

Saṃdhdh Dunhuang manuscript: Stein Tib. n°194 (49 folios) and Stein Tib.
n°683 (1 folio) (Hakamaya 1984–1987)
T
Taishō
676

Tokyo manuscript Kangyur

解深密經, translated by Xuanzang (596–664 ᴄᴇ)

TrBh

Sthiramati’s Triṃśikāvijñaptibhāṣyam

U

Urga xylograph Kangyur

V

Ulaanbaatar manuscript Kangyur

VD

Degé; xylograph of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi
from the Tengyur

VG

Golden; xylograph of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi
from the Tengyur

VP

Peking; xylograph of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi
from the Tengyur

VinSg

Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi

X

Basgo manuscript Kangyur

YBht P
’i

Tibetan translation of Acarya Asanga’s Yogācārabhūmi from the
Peking Tengyur (n°. 5540, sems-tsam, ’i 143aI-382a5 (vol. I l l : 121217)

Z

Shey Palace manuscript Kangyur

n.

NOTES

n.1

See glossary entry “ultimate.”

n.2

See Brunnhölzl 2018, p. 1590, n. 89 on this point.

n.3

The numbering of paragraphs of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra follows Lamotte’s
critical edition.

n.4

See Radich 2007, p. 1257 on the relationship between āśrayaparivṛtti and
dauṣṭhulyakāya. Saṃdh. is the only text in the entire Kangyur in which the
term dauṣṭhulyakāya is found.

n.5

In bold are textual resources I used to translate the text into English.

n.6

See Powers 2015. Unfortunately, I haven’t been able to consult this reference
work at the time of completing this translation.

n.7

Here is a list of the sigla I used to identify the various witnesses of Saṃdh.:
(1) Witnesses of the sūtra found in the available Kangyurs and canonical
collections (MsK = manuscript Kangyur, PK = xylograph): Kʙ: Berlin MsK, C:
Choné PK, Cz: Chizhi, D: Degé PK, Dd: Dodedrak, Dk: Dongkarla, F: Phukdrag
MsK, H: Lhasa PK, Gt: Gangteng, He: Hemis I, J: ’jang sa tham/Lithang PK,
L: London (Shelkar) MsK, Lg: Lang mdo, N: Narthang PK, Ng: Namgyal, Np:
Neyphug, O: Tawang, Pj: Phajoding I, Pz: Phajoding II, Kǫ: Peking 1737 PK,
R: Ragya, S: Stok MsK, T: Tokyo MsK, U: Urga PK, V: Ulaanbaatar MsK, W:
Wangli supplement, X: Basgo MsK, Z: Shey Palace MsK. Other canonical
collections: Ba: Basgo fragments (Ladakh), Bd: Bardan (Zanskar), Go:
Gondhla (Lahaul), Do: Dolpo. Source: http://www.rkts.org (last accessed on
July 20, 2020). I am following the typology of Kangyur groups suggested by
rKTs (Vienna University). I would like to warmly thank Professor Helmut
Tauscher and Bruno Lainé for making available to me the editions I used for

this translation project. For a general discussion of some Tibetan sources, see
Skilling 1994, p. 775.
(2) Xylographs of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi from the
Tengyur: VD Degé, VG Golden, VP Peking. My thanks go to Kojirō Katō for
having shared with me the bibliographical detail of these witnesses. The
Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī is also available in Chinese under the following title:

師地論卷第七⼗六攝決擇分.
n.8

瑜伽

For the reference of possible additional folios, see Chayet 2005, p. 67
(n°615—1 folio, n°590—6 folios).

n.9

解深密經疏 (ZZ369) is a text originally composed in Chinese that has been
translated into Tibetan. On Wonch’uk’s life and works, see Powers 1992a.

n.10

I would like to warmly thank Zhuoran Xie (Vienna University) for her
assistance in reading this text.

n.11

See also Katō 2011 for textual variations.

n.12

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 425ff.

n.13

See Schmithausen 2014, pp. 419–20, n. 1852. On necessary adjustments to
Lamotte’s rendition of the original Sanskrit terms, see Hakayama 1984, p. 180
and Delhey 2013.

n.14

See Tillemans 1997 for a review of Powers 1995. From a general perspective,
it seems that Powers chose to ignore the work and methodological approach
of Lamotte and Frauwallner.

n.15

See Schmithausen 1987 and 2014, Delhey 2013, and Skilling 2013 on the
simile of the illusionist (māyākāra), which is also included inter alia in the
Māyājāla, a sūtra also quoted in the Yogācārabhūmi.

n.16

On this issue, see Brunnhölzl 2018, pp. 414–18, n. 5.

n.17

See Steinkellner 1989 and Powers 1992a, 1992b, and 1998. For a review of
Powers 1998, refer to Wedemeyer 2003.

n.18

See for instance Hopkins 1999, 2002, and 2006.

n.19

See Lamotte 1935, p. 12ff., Ware 1937, Edgerton 1937, Edgerton 1953, p. 558,
and later Keenan 1980, p. 126, Powers 1991a, and Powers 1993b, p. 28ff.

n.20

Research relevant to terminological choices, syntactic reading of complex
passages, and interpretation of the meaning includes Powers 1991b, 1991c,

