༄༅།

།དངས་པ་ས་འལ།

Unraveling the Intent
Saṃdhinirmocana

འཕགས་པ་དངས་པ་ས་པར་འལ་པ་ས་་བ་ག་པ་ན་ ་མ།
’phags pa dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo
The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra “Unraveling the Intent”
Āryasaṃdhinirmocananāmamahāyānasūtra

· Toh 106 ·
Degé Kangyur, vol. 49 (mdo sde, ca), folios 1.b–55.b

Translated by the Buddhavacana Translation Group (Vienna)
under the patronage and supervision of 84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha
First published 2020
Current version v 1.0.27 (2025)
Generated by 84000 Reading Room v2.26.1
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha is a global non-profit initiative to translate all the
Buddha’s words into modern languages, and to make them available to everyone.

This work is provided under the protection of a Creative Commons CC BY-NC-ND (Attribution - Noncommercial - No-derivatives) 3.0 copyright. It may be copied or printed for fair use, but only with full
attribution, and not for commercial advantage or personal compensation. For full details, see the Creative
Commons license.

This print version was generated at 10.19pm on Wednesday, 12th February 2025 from the
online version of the text available on that date. If some time has elapsed since then, this
version may have been superseded, as most of 84000’s published translations undergo
significant updates from time to time. For the latest online version, with bilingual display,
interactive glossary entries and notes, and a variety of further download options, please see
https://84000.co/translation/toh106.

co.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ti. Title
im. Imprint
co. Contents
s.

Summary

ac. Acknowledgements
i.

Introduction
· Setting and Summary
· The Context
· Main Points of the Subject Matter
· The Basis
· The Path
· The Result
· Source Text and Various Versions
· Translation Issues and Academic Research
· 1. Identifying and organizing source texts
· 2. Evaluating the available translations
· 3. Checking intertextual patterns and delineating the scope of primary
sources
· 4. Collating academic research
· 5. Organizing academic resources according to the text structure and
specific translation issues
· Translating the text

tr. The Translation
p. Prologue
1. Chapter 1
2. Chapter 2
3. Chapter 3

4. Chapter 4
5. Chapter 5
6. Chapter 6
7. Chapter 7
8. Chapter 8
9. Chapter 9
10. Chapter 10
ab. Abbreviations
n. Notes
b. Bibliography
· Tibetan Sources
· Other Canonical Sources for Samdh.
· Other Sources
g. Glossary

s.

SUMMARY

s.1

In Unraveling the Intent, the Buddha gives a systematic overview of his three
great cycles of teachings, which he refers to in this text as the “three Dharma
wheels” (tridharmacakra). In the process of delineating the meaning of these
doctrines, the Buddha unravels several difficult points regarding the
ultimate and relative truths, the nature of reality, and the contemplative
methods conducive to the attainment of complete and perfect awakening,
and he also explains what his intent was when he imparted teachings
belonging to each of the three Dharma wheels. In unambiguous terms, the
third wheel is proclaimed to be of definitive meaning. Through a series of
dialogues with hearers and bodhisattvas, the Buddha thus offers a complete
and systematic teaching on the Great Vehicle, which he refers to here as the
Single Vehicle.

ac.
ac.1

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Translation by the Buddhavacana Translation Group.
The text was translated by Gregory Forgues and edited by Casey Kemp.
With special thanks to Harunaga Isaacson, Matthew Kapstein, Klaus-Dieter
Mathes, Jonathan Silk, Lambert Schmithausen, Tom Tillemans, and William
Waldron for their helpful comments and advice.
The translation was completed under the patronage and supervision of
84000: Translating the Words of the Buddha.

ac.2

The generous sponsorship of Qiang Li (

李强 ) and Ya Wen ( ⽂雅 ), which

helped make the work on this translation possible, is most gratefully
acknowledged.

i.

INTRODUCTION
· Setting and Summary ·

i.1

In Unraveling the Intent, the Buddha gives a systematic overview of his three
great cycles of teachings, which he refers to in this text as the “three Dharma
wheels” (tridharmacakra). In the process of delineating the meaning of these
doctrines, the Buddha unravels several difficult points regarding the
ultimate and relative truths, the nature of reality, and the contemplative
methods conducive to the attainment of complete and perfect awakening,
and he also explains what his intent was when he imparted teachings
belonging to each of the three Dharma wheels. Through a series of dialogues
with hearers and bodhisattvas, the Buddha thus offers a complete and
systematic teaching on the Great Vehicle, which he refers to here as the
Single Vehicle .

i.2

The sūtra is set in an unfathomable palace displayed by the Buddha’s
powers and attended by countless beings. The three gates of liberation
(emptiness, appearancelessness, and wishlessness) are the entrance to this
abode of the tathāgatas, the inconceivable nondual state of a buddha who,
possessed of the gnosis (jñāna) of the Tathāgata’s liberation, is dwelling in
the domain of truth (dharmadhātu), together with an immeasurable retinue of
hearers and a retinue of bodhisattvas including Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana, Vidhivatparipṛcchaka, Dharmodgata, Suviśuddhamati, Viśālamati,
Guṇākara, Paramārthasamudgata, Avalokiteśvara, Maitreya, and Mañjuśrī.

· The Context ·
i.3

The sūtra is structured in the form of a series of dialogues between the
Buddha and advanced bodhisattvas or hearers, as well as between
bodhisattvas (see chapter 1). These dialogues deal with both the theory and
practice of the entire bodhisattva path. Narrative elements are extremely
limited in this teaching. However, a narrative pattern can be found in

chapter 2 and 3, which begin, respectively, with a story about a group of
non-Buddhists (tīrthikas) and some followers of the Buddha who have
gathered to discuss a difficult point regarding the nature of reality and
cannot agree on anything. The main protagonists then beg the Buddha to
provide an explanation for the quandary these assemblies cannot not
resolve, or alternatively to explain his underlying intent when he expounded
the teachings that gave rise to conflicting interpretations.
i.4

Each chapter starts with a question on a topic requiring further
elucidation: In the first chapter, the bodhisattva Vidhivatparipṛcchaka
questions

the

bodhisattva

Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana

on

the

inexpressible (anabhilāpya) and nondual (advaya) ultimate. In the second
chapter, the bodhisattva Dharmodgata questions the Buddha on the ultimate
beyond speculation (sarvatarkasamatikrānta). In the third chapter, the
bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati questions the Buddha on the ultimate that is
beyond being distinct or indistinct (bhedābhedasamatikrānta) from conditioned
phenomena. In the fourth chapter, Subhūti questions the Buddha on the
ultimate that is of a single nature (ekarasa) within all phenomena. In the fifth
chapter, the bodhisattva Viśālamati questions the Buddha on the secrets of
mind (citta), thought (manas), and cognition (vijñāna). In the sixth chapter, the
bodhisattva Guṇākara questions the Buddha on the three defining
characteristics (lakṣaṇa) of phenomena. In the seventh chapter, the
bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata questions the Buddha on the three kinds
of essencelessness (niḥsvabhāvatā) as well as on the Buddha’s three turnings
of the Dharma wheel. In the eighth chapter, the bodhisattva Maitreya
questions the Buddha on the practice of mental stillness (śamatha) and
insight (vipaśyanā). In the ninth chapter, the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara
questions the Buddha on the stages of the bodhisattva path and the Single
Vehicle (ekayāna). In the tenth chapter, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī questions
the Buddha on the bodies (kāya) and activity of the tathāgatas.
i.5

From a broader perspective, it is possible to consider that the teaching
imparted in this sūtra is structured in terms of the basis (āśraya), the path
(mārga), and the result (phala). The first four chapters on the five
characteristics of the ultimate 1 as defined in the Prajñāpāramitā sūtras
represent a teaching on the abovementioned basis, namely, true reality
(tathatā) as it is; chapters 5–9, a teaching on the path in terms of practices and
stages to attain awakening; and chapter 10, a teaching on the result through
the doctrine of the tathāgatas’ bodies and activity to awaken beings. All
major Tibetan traditions consider chapter 3, focusing on the relation between
the two truths, and chapter 8, focusing on meditative practice, to be
authoritative. These are among the scriptures most quoted on their
respective topics by Tibetan authors regardless of lineage.

· Main Points of the Subject Matter ·
· · The Basis · ·
i.6

The first four chapters point out the nature of reality by distinguishing the
unconditioned from the conditioned, the pure from the afflicted, the ultimate
from the

conventional,

nondual

gnosis

from mind’s

elaborations,

inexpressible reality from conventional expressions, and the actual from the
imaginary. The first chapter thus starts with the distinction between
conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, which became a prevalent
theme in the various Abhidharmas. Through this distinction, the point is
made that the ultimate is inexpressible and nondual. The realization of this
inexpressible ultimate is achieved through gnosis alone. Conceptions in
terms of conditioned and unconditioned merely exist in the way of a magical
illusion. Yet, in order to lead beings to awakening, buddhas have to use such
labels. The second chapter elaborates on this very point. Although the
ultimate is beyond speculation, the Buddha taught liberation by means of
verbal expressions and conventions belonging to the domain of phenomenal
appearances and notions.
i.7

As a consequence, the first two chapters delineate two domains
corresponding to the two truths (satyadvaya): (1) the pure domain of the
ultimate, which, being inexpressible, nondual, and beyond speculation, is
the realm of nonconceptual gnosis free from conventional appearance and
notions, and (2) the afflicted domain of dualistic conventional expressions
and notions, which is the realm of mental elaborations. These domains are
respectively labeled by the buddhas as “the unconditioned” and “the
conditioned” only for the sake of instructing beings, for the Buddha explains
that this distinction between unconditioned and conditioned is only made
on the level of the conditioned, namely, from the perspective of dualistic
conventions. Within the realm of these conventional expressions, in the
context of the path, it follows that these two domains are apparently
mutually exclusive, although the Buddha hints at the fact that, from the
perspective of the ultimate, the conditioned is not the conditioned and the
unconditioned is not the unconditioned.

i.8

Chapter 3 explains how the relation between the ultimate and conditioned
phenomena seen from this higher perspective should be communicated on
the level of conventions. From this standpoint, one cannot say whether the
ultimate is distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena. The Buddha
shows that positing these two domains as distinct or indistinct is wrong.
Since conditioned phenomena are characterized by the fact of being
produced by causes and conditions, it is inappropriate to conceive (a) the
conditioned and (b) the emptiness of an inherent nature as either identical or

different. On the one hand, being conditioned (i.e., dependent on something
other) is identical with being empty of an intrinsic nature; on the other hand,
the domain of the conditioned is defined as the realm of afflictions, while the
domain of the unconditioned is understood as the pure realm. Some might
therefore think that phenomena and the nature of phenomena are distinct,
but the Buddha teaches in the fourth chapter that the empty nature of
conditioned phenomena, the ultimate, cannot be said to be distinct from
those phenomena. As such, this subtle and profound ultimate is indeed of a
single character within phenomena whose defining characteristic appears to
be diverse. To realize this nature of phenomena, which is unconditioned
selflessness, one should only rely on nondual gnosis, not mind.

· · The Path · ·
i.9

Chapter 5 is a presentation of the “secrets of mind, thought, and cognition.”
Here the Buddha introduces the concept of “appropriating cognition”
(ādānavijñāna), also called “subliminal cognition” (ālayavijñāna), “mind” (citta),
or “mind containing all the seeds” (sarvabījaṃ cittam). This mind, in which
mental events manifest, acts is like a mirror in which reflections appear. It is
the basis of previous mental imprints resulting from volitions and actions
that create predispositions (i.e., latent dispositions) to experience reality in
conventional terms. However, once bodhisattvas cognize in an intuitive and
personal way the ultimate by means of gnosis, they no longer perceive this
mind.2 In the closing verses of this chapter, the Buddha explains that this
mind is without a self, since it is conditioned and composed by seeds.
Through these definitions, the Buddha de facto delineates two realms: the
domain of dualistic mind and the domain of nondual gnosis.

i.10

Chapter 6 is a teaching on the three defining characteristics (lakṣaṇa) of
phenomena: the imaginary defining characteristic (parikalpitalakṣaṇa), the
other-dependent defining characteristic (paratantralakṣaṇa), and the actual
defining characteristic (pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa): (1) The imaginary defining
characteristic is the superimposition onto phenomena of an essence or a
defining characteristic existing from its own side, by means of designations
or conventional expressions. This imaginary characteristic is utterly false in
the way of a visual aberration, since phenomena are ultimately devoid of any
defining characteristic that makes them what they are. (2) The otherdependent defining characteristic corresponds to the dependent arising of
phenomena. It refers to phenomenal appearances upon which an imaginary
defining characteristic is superimposed. This point is grasped once the
imaginary defining characteristic of phenomena is understood to be a wrong
conception. It is worth noting

that the other-dependent defining

characteristic delineates the domain of conditioned cognitions, namely, the
mind as presented in chapter 5 (this point is made clear in 7.10 with regard to
karma and rebirth), and as such, represents the domain of affliction (see 6.11).3 (3) The actual defining characteristic is the permanent and immutable
reality of phenomena. It is the ultimate unerring object that is manifest once
the selflessness of phenomena, the nonexistence of any fictive defining
characteristic in phenomena arising dependently, has been realized. Only
the actual defining characteristic constitutes the domain of purification, since
the other-dependent defines the domain of affliction, namely, the realm of
the conditioned. In the closing verses of this chapter, the Buddha gives a
quintessential presentation of the path: one should first recognize that
phenomena are devoid of imaginary defining characteristics by seeing them
as mere designations superimposed on conditioned cognitions. At that time,
one

will abandon

phenomena

characterized by

affliction, namely,

conditioned phenomena in the form of conditioned cognitions, and turn
toward phenomena characterized by purification that are in harmony with
ultimate reality.
i.11

Chapter 7 begins with Paramārthasamudgata’s question: why did the
Buddha first teach the defining characteristic of phenomena, their arising,
their cessation, and so forth through the notions of the five aggregates, the
twelve sense domains, and so on, when he later explained that all
phenomena are without an essence? The Buddha answers by teaching the
three kinds of essencelessness, namely, essencelessness regarding defining
characteristics, essencelessness regarding arising, and essencelessness
regarding

the

ultimate:

(1)

Essencelessness

regarding

defining

characteristics refers to the imaginary defining characteristic of phenomena.
It is the essencelessness of what is utterly nonexistent (i.e., the defining
characteristic), which is like a sky flower. (2) Essencelessness regarding
arising refers to the other-dependent defining characteristic of phenomena
arising from causes other than themselves. It is presented as the magic
illusion of dependent arising, in the context of this teaching the magic
illusion of mind. (3) Essencelessness regarding the ultimate has two aspects.
The first is the essencelessness of all conditioned phenomena with regard to
the ultimate. As a corollary of dependent arising, those phenomena are in
fact not born as anything, being dependent on causes and conditions for
their

arising

and

therefore

impermanent.

The

second

aspect

of

essencelessness with regard to the ultimate refers to the only unconditioned
object of purification, the actual defining characteristic of phenomena, the
ultimate selflessness of phenomena, which is like space, itself also

unconditioned. This permanent and immutable nature of phenomena is the
primordial state of peace of that which, being without a defining
characteristic, is unborn and unceasing, by nature in the state of nirvāṇa.
i.12

In 7.10, the Buddha describes the entire process leading to confusion:
beings reify the other-dependent and the actual defining characteristics in
terms of the imaginary defining characteristic. Failing to understand that
conventional expressions do not refer to actual things, they superimpose an
essence on conditioned cognitions and imagine reality to be just as it is
described by their linguistic conventions. Figments of imagination become
causes and conditions for their mental activities, which will lead them to the
afflictions of action and rebirth. The process described here is akin to a world
of virtual reality where even the projector, the conditioned mind, is
imaginary. As one takes the projected phenomena as real and reifies them,
one acts, suffers, dies, and is endlessly “respawned” within this virtual
reality. Although this pseudo-reality projected by mind is nonexistent, it will
condition one’s mind and one’s future existence as one will act in
accordance with one’s state of mind within this virtual reality. In 7.10, the
other-dependent is therefore equated with the appropriating mind, the basis
of the imaginary defining characteristic of phenomena, the object of
dreamlike conceptualizations (see also 7.25).

i.13

Next, the Buddha explains how various beings relate to this process and
how he has helped them with teachings corresponding to their
circumstances and capacities. For example, some can understand on a
dualistic level that defining characteristics (i.e., the virtual reality of
phenomena) lack an essence, and thus slowly develop repulsion toward
conditioned phenomena, even if they are not able to realize the ultimate
nature of phenomena, their nondual primordial selflessness which is the
domain of gnosis. In accordance with this model of reality, the Buddha
declares that there is only the path and journey toward liberation and thus a
Single Vehicle for both hearers and bodhisattvas because there is only a
single purification.

i.14

In 7.30, Paramārthasamudgata defines the three turnings of the wheel of
Dharma. Because this doctrine is included in this specific chapter, it seems
logical to interpret the three turnings of the wheel of Dharma in relation to
the three kinds of essencelessness: (1) The first turning used the notion that
phenomena have a defining characteristic to teach the essencelessness of
these defining characteristics in a series of teachings such as the five
aggregates, the twelve sense domains, and so on (see also 4.1–6). In our
metaphor on virtual reality, one could see these teachings as being
expounded on the basis of the very imaginary phenomena conceptualized as
truly existing. When children experience a nightmare, their parents show

that the monster does not exist by implicitly, i.e. provisionally, accepting its
existence, saying, “Look! It is not there.” (2) The second turning of the wheel
teaches the first aspect of essencelessness with regard to the ultimate,
stating that phenomena are unborn. From this perspective, the primordial
selflessness of phenomena is still taught in relation to dualistic phenomena.
As a consequence, Paramārthasamudgata considers this cycle of teachings
as provisional. (3) The third turning of the wheel aims at teaching the second
aspect of essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in a way that is not
limited to the domain of dualistic phenomena. To pursue our metaphor, this
third cycle of teachings gives a complete overview of the three defining
characteristics of phenomena: the completely imaginary experience of a
virtual reality, the magic illusion of the projecting mind, and the primordial
domain of gnosis. Paramārthasamudgata declares the third turning to be of
definitive meaning.
i.15

It is worth noting that the doctrine of the three defining characteristics can
be seen as delineating three great categories of soteriological approaches
found in Indo-Tibetan Buddhist traditions: (1) the deconstruction of putative
notions of an individual self through mereological and relational strategies;
(2) the deconstruction of notions of a self regarding conditioned phenomena
through the impossibility of their ultimate arising, since these conditioned
phenomena merely exist in dependence; and (3) the pointing out of the
nondual ultimate nature of phenomena, which altogether bypasses
imaginary mental constructions.

i.16

In the eighth chapter, the famous Maitreya chapter on meditation, the
Buddha first gives a series of definitions followed by the description of a
process, a pattern frequently used in this sūtra. First, the objects of the
practices of mental stillness (śamatha) and insight (vipaśyanā) are defined as,
respectively, an image without and with conceptualization, while their
objects, when both practices are combined, are the point where things end
(vastvanta) and the accomplishment of the goal (kṛtyānuṣṭhāna, i.e., the
attainment of the path). Mental stillness consists in directing one’s attention
(manasikāra) inward toward the mind that is directing attention (see 8.3). It
follows a state of inner absorption produced by concentrating on a
referential object. The practice of insight consists in analyzing, discerning,
and differentiating the various cognitive aspects of the image (pratibimba)
that is the object of concentration. These two practices are neither different
nor identical. They are not different in that they take mind as a referential
object, but they are not identical because insight takes a conceptual image as
its referential object. The Buddha thus explains in an often-cited passage that
this image taken as an object of concentration is not different from mind
insofar as cognition is constituted by the mere representation (vijñaptimātra)

that is the object of this cognition. The mind and the image, which is its
object manifesting as a mental event, appear as different, although they are
not. All mental images, whether in the context of practice or not, are mere
representations. Once one has realized this, directing one’s attention toward
true reality is the one-pointedness of mind in which mental stillness and
insight are unified. A superior way to practice this path is therefore to focus
on that which is universal in all the various specific teachings imparted by
the Buddha. This approach, which is based on a practice devoid of mental
engagement (vitarka) and investigation (vicāra), directly focuses on the
element that converges toward true reality. The ensuing shift in one’s basis
of existence (āśrayaparivṛtti) mentioned in this sūtra does not here refer to a
transformation of the subliminal cognition (ālayavijñāna). According to 10.2,
this shift, once all corruption has been eliminated, consists in nothing other
than the bodhisattva’s attainment of the truth body (dharmakāya).
i.17

The Buddha then explains how one attends to phenomenal appearances
in an increasingly nonconceptual way. He also gives an elucidation of the
analytical knowledge of designations (dharmapratisaṃvid) and their objects
(arthapratisaṃvid) attained through the practice of mental stillness and
insight. In this context, a few key definitions are given; for example, the true
reality of representations is that all conditioned phenomena are mere
representations (see 8.20.2.iii). When presented in four aspects, the analytical
knowledge of designations and their objects encapsulate the entire path
through the four stages of mental appropriation, experience, affliction, and
purification. When asked about the nature of gnosis, the Buddha answers
that it “consists in the mental stillness and insight that take a universal
teaching as a referential object” while “perception consists in the mental
stillness and insight that take a specific teaching as a referential object” (see
8.25). Practically, bodhisattvas direct their attention to true reality, discarding
the phenomenal appearances of designations and objects of designation.
Without taking any essential characteristic as a referential object, they do not
pay attention to phenomenal appearances. Their attention is focused on that
which is of a single character within all phenomena. The Buddha then gives
a list of all the phenomenal appearances eliminated by emptiness, from the
emptiness of all phenomena up to the emptiness of emptiness. By letting go
of their object of concentration, the phenomenal appearance corresponding
to a mental image, bodhisattvas free themselves from the bonds of
conditioned

phenomenal

appearances

(nimitta).

Connecting

these

instructions on meditative practice with his teaching on the three defining
characteristics, the

Buddha

explains

that he

taught the

defining

characteristic of emptiness in the Great Vehicle as the nonexistence and

nonperception of an imaginary defining characteristic with regard to both
affliction and purification in the other-dependent and actual defining
characteristics of phenomena.
i.18

Practical instructions are also given to overcome obstacles and distractions
to the practice of mental stillness and insight. On the ultimate stage of the
path, these practices eliminate extremely subtle obstructions resulting in the
complete purification of the truth body. The gnosis and vision utterly free
from attachment and hindrance are attained. Finally, the Buddha explains
how bodhisattvas obtain their great powers by being skillful in the following
six points: (1) the arising of the mind, (2) the underlying condition of the
mind, (3) the emergence from the mind, (4) the increase of the mind, (5) the
decrease of the mind, and (6) skillful means. In this section of the Maitreya
chapter, an overview of the vijñaptimātra doctrine is given through the notion
of cognition, which includes the appropriating cognition as well as the
arising cognitions taking various phenomenal appearances as their object. In
this context, it is explained that the supramundane mind of the buddhas
does not have any phenomenal appearance as its object.

i.19

In chapter 9, the Buddha is questioned on the stages (bhūmi) of a
bodhisattva and a buddha, the names of these stages, and their adverse
factors and specific arising, as well as on the ten perfections (pāramitā). A
final instruction is imparted regarding the Single Vehicle. As mentioned in
previous chapters, the Buddha explains that he taught the essence of
phenomena in the vehicle of hearers in terms of the aggregates, the sense
domains, and so on, and that he presented these phenomena in the light of a
single principle in the Great Vehicle, the domain of truth (dharmadhātu).
Those who conceptualize these teachings by taking them literally do not
understand his underlying intention, which is that both vehicles are in fact
teachings based on a single principle.

· · The Result · ·
i.20

In the tenth chapter, Mañjuśrī questions the Buddha on the defining
characteristic of the truth body of the tathāgatas. The Buddha explains the
truth body in the sense of a result attained through the practice of the stages
and perfections. This attainment consists in a shift in one’s basis of existence.
From the perspective of beings belonging to the domain of mental
elaborations and conditioned phenomena, the truth body is therefore
inconceivable, being utterly beyond mental elaborations,. Here again the
Buddha delineates two distinct realms.

i.21

The tathāgatas, who appear as emanation bodies (nirmāṇakāya), are said to
be like a manifestation, an apparition. Through their skillful means and
sovereign power (adhiṣṭhāna), they liberate beings by imparting three kinds
of teaching: the sūtras, the Vinaya, and the mātṛkās (generally taken as more
or less equivalent to the Abhidharma and related literature): (1) The sūtras
teach what was heard, how to take refuge, the training, and the awakening.
(2) The Vinaya teaches the precepts and prātimokṣa vows to hearers and
bodhisattvas. (3) The mātṛkās are systematic teachings on important
doctrinal points, such as the defining characteristic of the conventional and
the ultimate, the defining characteristic of referential objects consisting of
the awakening factors and their features, and so forth. In the section of the
mātṛkā pertaining to the ascertainment of the qualities of cognitive objects,
the Buddha goes into a lengthy discussion on logical analysis according to
the four principles of reason (yukti): (1) the principle of reason based on
dependence (apekṣāyukti), (2) the principle of reason based on cause and
effect (kāryakāraṇayukti), (3) the principle of reason based on logical proof
(upapattisādhanayukti), and (4) the principle of reason based on the nature of
phenomena itself (dharmatāyukti). The explanation given by the Buddha on
the third yukti of this list (cf. 10.7.4.vii.c) is very extensive and resembles a
short treatise on epistemology in which the notion of means of knowledge or
valid cognition (pramāṇa) is meticulously investigated. In this section, the
Buddha explains the characteristics of valid and invalid reasonings. He
concludes by stating that three types of valid cognition should be accepted:
direct cognition (pratyakṣa), inference (anumāna), and authoritative scriptures
(āptāgama).

i.22

The Buddha next elucidates “the meaning of the dhāraṇī through which
bodhisattvas comply with the underlying intention of the profound Dharma
expounded by the tathāgatas, the complete meaning of the sūtras, the
Vinaya, and the mātṛkās.” This quintessential teaching encapsulating the
meaning of the entire Dharma states that beings are in truth beyond activity
and beyond being afflicted or purified. It is only because of their reification
of illusory phenomena in terms of identity and essence that they conceive
their reality in the way they do, which leads them to suffering. Abandoning
this “body afflicted by corruption” (dauṣṭhulyakāya),4 they obtain the truth
body that is inconceivable and unconditioned (i.e., the dharmakāya). In this
context, the Buddha concludes by explaining that the tathāgatas are not
characterized by mind, thought, and cognition. Their mind arises without
effort in the way of an emanation (nirmāṇa). In their case, one cannot say
whether their mind exists or not, their domain consisting of pure realms. It
follows that the tathāgatas are characterized by nonduality: “They are
neither completely and perfectly awakened nor not completely and perfectly

awakened; they neither turn the wheel of Dharma nor do not turn the wheel
of Dharma; they neither attain the great parinirvāṇa nor do not attain the
great parinirvāṇa. This is because the truth body is utterly pure and the
emanation body constantly manifests.” Once the truth body has been
purified through the practice focusing on the domain of truth (dharmadhātu),
“the great light of gnosis manifests in beings, and innumerable emanated
reflections arise.” One should keep in mind, though, the teachings imparted
in Chapter 3 on the conventional and ultimate truths. From the perspective
of the ultimate, nothing has ever been purified by anybody, as the
concluding verses of the formula in Chapter 10 make clear:
i.23

“The possessors of qualities resulting from affliction and purification
Are all without movement and without a person;
Therefore, I declare them to be without activity,
As they are neither purified nor afflicted, be it in the past or the future.

i.24

“Relying on views resulting from their latent dispositions,
On account of which they wrongly conceive the body afflicted by
corruption,
They reify [the ego through concepts such as] ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
As a consequence, notions arise, such as ‘I see,’ ‘I eat,’ ‘I do,’ ‘I am
afflicted,’ and ‘I am purified.’

i.25

“Thus, those who understand this fact as it really is
Abandon the body afflicted by corruption and instead
Will obtain a body that is not a support for any defilement,
Being free from mental elaborations and unconditioned.”

· Source Text and Various Versions ·
i.26

The only complete extant versions of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra (Saṃdh.) are
Chinese and Tibetan translations produced from Sanskrit manuscripts. All
the recensions of the sūtra in Tibetan include a prologue followed by ten
chapters. In addition to the various Kangyur editions, the sūtra is also
quoted in full in the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi. The list of the
available recensions of the text across Sanskrit, Chinese, and Tibetan
include:5
1. Sanskrit (including Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit)
• Buescher 2007: 102–104 (quotations in TrBh, 33.25–34.4 drawn from
Saṃdh. 5.5 and 5.7; see also Lévi 1925: 33–34)
• Matsuda 1995 (complete reconstruction from manuscript of Saṃdh. 9.1–
6)

• Matsuda 2013 (fragments of Saṃdh. 2.4 and 3.1, fragments of 8.39–40,
comple te re cons truction from manuscript of 8.41)
• Nagao 1964: 43 (gives the list of the seven kinds of tattva mentioned in
Saṃdh. 8.20.2 and quoted in the Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya)
• Nagao 1982–1987: I.4, I.7.6
• Tucci 1971: 1 (two verses from Saṃdh. 3.7 that are quoted in Kamalaśīla’s
Bhāvanākrama: nimittabandhanāj jantur atho dauṣṭhulabandhanāt / vipaśyanāṃ
bhāvayitvā śamathañ ca vimucyata iti) and ibid., p. 22 (a sentence drawn from
7.15 also quoted in the Bhāvanākrama: ekāntasattvārthavimukhasya ekāntasaṃsārābhisaṃskāravimukhasya [nā] uttarā samyaksaṃbodhir uktā mayeti)
2. Chinese
•

相續解脫地波羅蜜了義經 (Taishō 678) and 相續解脫如來所作隨順處了義經

(Taishō 679) translated by Guṇabhadra (394–468 ᴄᴇ) between 435 and 443
ᴄᴇ (these two texts include respectively chapters 9 and 10)
•

深密解脫經 (Taishō 675) translated by Bodhiruci (fl. 508–535 ᴄᴇ) in 514

(includes a prologue followed by ten chapters as in the Tibetan versions of
the text)
•

佛說解節經 (Taishō 677) translated by Paramārtha (498–569 ᴄᴇ) in 557

(mentioned in Wonch’uk’s commentaries on the sūtra; the prologue is
different from those translated by Bodhiruci and Xuanzang; only the first
four chapters are translated)
•

解深密經 (Taishō 676) translated by Xuanzang (596–664 ᴄᴇ) in 647 (a

complete translation of the prologue and the ten chapters)
3. Tibetan
a. Tshalpa group
• Kʙ116 mdo sde, ca 1b1–71a1 (vol. 57)7
• C747 mdo sde, ca 1b1–71a7 (vol. 29)
• D106 mdo sde, ca 1b1–55b7 (vol. 49)
• J51 mdo sde, ca 1b1–59b8 (vol. 44)
• Kǫ774 mdo sna tshogs, ngu 1b1–60b7 (vol. 29, p. 1)
• R106 mdo sde, ca 1b1–55b7 (vol. 49)
• U106 mdo sde, ca 1b1–55b7 (vol. 49)
• VD D4038 mdo ’grel (sems tsam), zi 44a–97b
• VG GT3542 mdo ’grel (sems tsam), ’i 59b–136a
• VP Kǫ5539 mdo ’grel (sems tsam), ’i 47b–109a
b. Thempangma group
• L82 mdo sde, na 1b1–80b1 (vol. 42)
• S106 mdo sde, na 1b1–80b1 (vol. 63)
• T107 mdo sde, na 1b1–70b1 (vol. 68)
• V156 mdo sde, na 1b1–69b6 (vol. 65)

• Z137 mdo, na 1b1–93a6 (vol. 59)
c. Mustang group
• X mdo sde, wa 66a–132a
• He64.6 mdo, wa 62b5–125b8
d. Bhutan group
• Cz082-001 mdo, na 1b1–82a5
• Dd031-001 mdo, ca 1b1–69b2
• Dk034-001 mdo, na 1b1–87b1
• Gt028-001 mdo, na 1b1–72b3
• Np012-001 mdo, na 1b1–87a7
• Pj043-001 mdo, ca 1b1–62b4
• Pz045-001 mdo ca 1b1–61a5
e. Mixed/Independent editions
• F156 mdo sde, ba (tsha) 1b1–72a7 (vol. 68)
• H109 mdo sde, ca 1b1–87b7 (vol. 51)
• Lg11.8 mdo, da-L74 224b5–276a2
• N94 mdo sde, ca 1–81a7 (vol. 51)
• Ng13.07 mdo pa dgongs 111b3–162a8
• O23 mdo sde, cha
f. Other canonical collections
• Ablaikit collection IOM, RAS Tib.979/117
• Go19,01 ka 1b–36a6 (vol. 19)
• Bd3.7 vol. 3 (ta) pha 1b1–84a6
• Do mdo sde, da 196a–246b
g. Dunhuang manuscripts
• SaṃdhDH: Stein Tib. n°194 (49 folios); Stein Tib. n°683 (1 folio) (these
folios cover ca. 40% of the sūtra; see Hakayama 1984–1987)8
i.27

In addition, five commentaries have been composed on the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra:
• Asaṅga’s Āryasaṃdhinirmocanabhāṣya (dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa’i rnam par
bshad pa) D3981 mdo ’grel (mdo), ngi 1b–11b
• Wonch’uk’s *Āryagambhīrasaṃdhinirmocanasūtraṭīkā (dgongs pa zab
mo nges par ’grel pa’i mdo rgya cher ’grel pa) D4016 mdo ’grel (mdo), ti 1b–
di 175a9
• Jñāṇagarbha’s Āryasaṃdhinirmocanasūtre āryamaitreyakevalaparivartabhāṣya
(dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa’i mdo las ’phags pa byams pa’i le’u nyi tshe bshad pa)
D4033 mdo ’grel (sems tsam), bi 318b–345a
• Changchup Dzutrül (byang chub rdzu ’phrul)’s *Āryasaṃdhinirmocanasūtravyākhyāna (bstan bcos sna tshogs), D4358 mdo ’grel, co 1b–jo 183b

• Trisong Detsen (khri srong lde brtsan)’s *Samyagvākpramāṇoddhṛtasūtra (bka’
yang dag pa’i tshad ma las mdo btus pa) D4352 mdo ’grel (bstan bcos sna
tshogs), co 173a–205b

· Translation Issues and Academic Research ·
i.28

I applied various methods and followed a series of steps during the process
of translating the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra from the Tibetan:

· · 1. Identifying and organizing source texts · ·
i.29

I first collated all the available Tibetan editions of Saṃdhinirmocana: Bd, C, D,
Dunhuang (Hakayama 1984–87), Do, F, H, L, N, S, Kǫ, U, VD, X, and Z, as
well as the various extant Sanskrit fragments found in Buescher (2007), Levi
(1925), Matsuda (1995, 2013), Nagao (1964), and Tucci (1971). For the
Chinese, we used Xuanzang’s translation.10 I then produced a critical edition
of the text prologue (nidāna) to get a sense of the textual variations across
major available editions of the Tshalpa (tshal pa), Thempangma (them spangs
ma), mixed Kangyurs, and independent Kangyur groups. In addition, Dr.
Kojirō Katō (Tokyo University), who is editing the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra,
kindly sent me his critical edition of the seventh chapter.11 His work has
proved invaluable to confirming the findings of my own work on the
prologue. The editions belonging to the Thempangma differ significantly
from those included in the Tshalpa line of transmission. As an independent
Kangyur close to the Thempangma line, the Phukdrak (phug brag) edition
offers very interesting readings on the level of syntax and lexicography
compared to the editions of the Tshalpa group. It also diverges from the
Thempangma witnesses in many locations. In the absence of colophons
mentioning the translators’ and editors’ names across the available editions,
it remains difficult to understand the history of these witnesses from the
perspective of the underlying translation and editing process. As a
consequence of its palatable variant readings compared to the Tshalpa and
Thempangma editions, I used the Phukdrak witness quite extensively while
translating the Degé edition, as well as the Stok edition and the Degé version
of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī, to examine more thoroughly difficult passages.
The available Sanskrit fragments were on occasion also useful to determine
the Sanskrit equivalent of a Tibetan technical term. They, however, did not
reveal major variations from the Tibetan texts. I referred to the Dunhuang
recension sporadically, as Schmithausen warned us not to follow it blindly.12
I also referred to Xuanzang’s translation regarding a few difficult passages
of the text. This translation is similar to those of the Tshalpa group and might

have been carried out on the basis of a Sanskrit manuscript similar to the one
(or those) used for the translation upon which the Tibetan Tshalpa editions
are based.

· · 2. Evaluating the available translations · ·
i.30

The Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra is a major text of Indian Buddhism that has early
on attracted the attention of Buddhist Studies scholars. It has been translated
into French, English, and German (partially). Lamotte (1935) provided a
critical edition of Saṃdhinirmocana and a translation from Tibetan (N) and
Chinese (Taishō 676) into French. He also attempted to reconstruct or
identify technical terms in Sanskrit, which have for the most part been
confirmed by subsequent finds of Sanskrit fragments.13 Lamotte’s work is a
major resource for the study of Saṃdhinirmocana. It has been until now the
standard edition and translation of this text on account of its accuracy and
methodological academic approach. As a side note, I followed Lamotte’s
segmentation of the text into paragraphs. His French translation is generally
reliable, although some technical passages can be significantly improved,
particularly in the case of chapter 8 on meditation and chapter 10 on the
result of the path. Frauwallner (1969) gives a partial translation of Saṃdhinirmocana (i.e., chapters 6 and 7) from Tibetan into German. As one would
expect, Frauwallner’s academic translation of these two chapters aims at
accuracy over readability. Kawasaki 1976 is also a partial translation of
chapter 8 into English (§6.1–9). This translation does not improve Lamotte’s.
Powers’ (1995) translation from Tibetan (D) into English, in spite of its merit,
could be widely improved upon in terms of methodology, accuracy, and
readability.14 Brunnhölzl 2018 offers a partial translation of chapter 7, as well
as a few key passages from chapter 5.

i.31

Translations by Cleary (1999) and Keenan (2000) are from the Chinese
(Taishō 676) into English. I used Keenan’s work to get a sense of the Chinese
text while translating the Degé edition but only referred to Cleary
occasionally. Keenan’s work seems to me more accurate than Cleary’s,
although the latter was useful for unraveling difficult passages, since his
style is more free and primarily intends to communicate the meaning of the
text. Cornu (2005) has provided a translation of the text from Tibetan (D) into
French that mainly follows Powers 1995, a somewhat regrettable fact since
Lamotte’s (1935) is more accurate. Schmithausen’s (2014) work contains
numerous difficult passages of Saṃdhinirmocana translated from various
Tibetan and Chinese editions into English. It is an invaluable resource for

the study of Saṃdhinirmocana. In addition, it offers useful Sanskrit
reconstructions of important technical terms. Together with Lamotte’s
translation, it has been a constant companion while translating the text.

· · 3. Checking intertextual patterns and delineating the scope of primary · ·
sources
i.32

The Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra is part of a larger network of texts, both in the
Kangyur and the Tengyur:

i.33

1. The nidāna of Saṃdhinirmocana almost exactly matches those of the Buddhabhūmisūtra (D275) and the Tathāgataguṇajñānācintyaviṣayāvatāranirdeśasūtra
(D185). The Buddhabhūmisūtra is a very short text that was also translated into
Chinese by Xuanzang in 646 (see Keenan 1980, p. 336ff.). Textual parallelisms
of this kind are useful to double checking some passages or gathering more
background information about the source text.

i.34

2. As mentioned above, Saṃdhinirmocana is also found in extenso in the
Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi and is therefore part of a tradition of
texts sharing common ideas.15 This point should be kept in mind while
translating, particularly when one has to evaluate the potential impact of
terminological choices from the perspective of a more philosophical
approach to the text, which, in the case of Saṃdhinirmocana, should be a major
concern. For example, one should pay attention to the fact that interpreting
“representation-only”

(vijñaptimātra)

as

a

strong

form

of

idealism

essentializing mind could be misleading from the perspective of a cultural
translation of the worldview propounded in Saṃdhinirmocana since mind, just
as much as the external object, is explicitly declared to be empty of any ownbeing, essence, or intrinsic nature (see chapter 8 on the three kinds of niḥsvabhāvatā) in this text.16
i.35

3. Another important point is the presence of the aforementioned five
commentaries on Saṃdhinirmocana found in the Tengyur (D).17 I occasionally
referred to these works while finalizing the final draft of the translation.
However, I first focused on the available editions of Saṃdhinirmocana itself as
I did not want to be influenced by the interpretations of later authors.
Instead, I attempted to go through all possible logically meaningful readings
according to the Tibetan and Sanskrit sources without any preconceptions
resulting from my reading of later commentarial traditions.

i.36

4. In the same vein, one should note that Saṃdhinirmocana has played a major
role in Tibetan hermeneutical debates. For centuries, it has been considered a
central scripture referred to extensively in the writings of Tibet’s great

luminaries, such as Jé Tsongkhapa (rje tsong kha pa, 1357–1419) or Jamgön
Mipham Gyatso (’jam mgon mi pham rgya mtsho, 1846–1912). While it would
certainly be fascinating to study the impact of Saṃdhinirmocana in the context
of Tibetan Madhyamaka,18 I chose not to take into account Indian or Tibetan
commentaries or exegeses of the sūtra in order to focus on the source text
itself.

· · 4. Collating academic research · ·
i.37

I proceeded to search all articles and monographs referring to Saṃdhinirmocana I could find at the very beginning of this translation project. In this
quest for relevant academic research, I benefited from the excellent
bibliography found in Delhey 2013 regarding research done on the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi, which I expanded with a list of
complementary reference works (see the bibliography). Among the existing
academic literature on Saṃdhinirmocana, Schmithausen 2014 stands out and,
unsurprisingly, proved to be a major resource for this translation project.

··

i.38

5. Organizing academic resources according to the text structure and
specific translation issues

··

1. The translation of the title of the text became the object of several
discussions among scholars regarding the meaning of the Sanskrit words
saṃdhi and nirmocana as a consequence of Lamotte’s first complete
translation of the text.19 Among the various available options, I opted for
simplicity and translated the Sanskrit Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra with “The Sūtra
Unraveling the Intent,” which I believe renders accurately the meaning and
structure of the text. Various interlocutors indeed ask the Buddha repeatedly
to explain difficult points in order to clarify the purpose of his seemingly
contradictory or complex doctrines on the nature of reality.

i.39

2. Regarding the content of the sūtra itself, I proceeded to organize
secondary sources by chapter and referenced this research in the notes
accompanying my translation.20 The last chapter of Saṃdhinirmocana includes
a very technical passage on valid cognition (pramāṇa) whose definitions
predate Dignāga’s system of logic. Translating Trisong Detsen’s *Samyagvākpramāṇoddhṛtasūtra, which is a commentary on the teaching on the four
principles of reason (rigs pa bzhi), would help us better understand preDignāgean Buddhist logic.21

· · · Translating the text · · ·

i.40

In this stage of the overall process, I followed Jean-François Billeter’s
pragmatic approach to the translation of classical Chinese texts. This
approach consists in five operations:22

i.41

1. The first stage of the translation process is purely analytical. A passage is
translated on the basis of lexicographical resources (e.g., dictionaries) and
syntactic rules (e.g., grammars). During this operation, it is important to
distinguish what is understood and what still remains problematic. All
options should be kept open. Interpretations or eisegetical readings should
be rejected. From a practical perspective, I systematically used the
Mahāvyutpatti to find the Sanskrit terms behind general Tibetan expressions.
For technical terms, I relied on Schmithausen (2014) and the academic
research mentioned above.

i.42

Our Tibetan text is itself a translation. This somewhat complicates our task
since we have to decipher the Sanskrit behind the Tibetan in order to make
sense of some difficult sentences or passages. However, this approach is
necessary on a lexicographical and syntactic level as can be seen in the
following examples: One should read the Tibetan brtsams pa as ārabhya, a
Buddhist hybrid Sanskrit expression that has the meaning of “referring
to/having to do with” and not “beginning with.”23 Likewise, rab tu phye ba
stands for prabhāvita, which in the Saṃdhinirmocana means “consisting
in/characterized as/characterized by” and not “distinguished.”24 The
problem is even more acute in the case of Sanskrit compounds that have
been translated into Tibetan according to the way they were formulated in
Sanskrit. As an illustration of this, compounds ending with lakṣaṇa (Tib.
mtshan nyid) often make more sense in Saṃdhinirmocana as bahuvrīhis than
karmadhārayas or tatpuruṣas, not to mention dvandvas. Lamotte thus reads rtog
ge kun las ’das mtshan nyid (sarvatarkasamatikrāntalakṣaṇa) as a bahuvrīhi,25 which
I believe is appropriate in the context of the passage in question.

i.43

2. Once a “technically correct” translation of the source text has been
produced, Billeter advises us to bring together the various elements of a
sentence or a passage until we obtain a clear picture of what is said in the
source text. This step therefore consists in understanding the meaning of the
translated passage by literally seeing (or visualizing) its meaning. In a way,
the first operation is about das Erklären (“explanation”), while the second
concerns das Verstehen (“understanding”). In this sense, the latter uses the
resources of one’s imagination and metalinguistic knowledge to establish
connections with a web of meaning that is not restricted to the translated
sentence or passage alone.

i.44

The second operation is therefore a synthesis, a recognition of relations
between meaning units of various orders (one would think here of the idea
conveyed by saṃjñā and similar terms in which the upasarga sam- plays a
central role), whereas the first phase is analytical (in the sense of vicāra,
vicāraṇa, and vijñāna, in which the upasarga vi- expresses the notion of taking
apart). In fact, translators translate into the target language their
comprehension of the source text. They actually never translate the text itself
but their understanding or representation of ideas, situations, and emotions
conveyed by a text. To illustrate this point, one could mention the problem,
encountered by scholars, of translating terms related to meditative practice.
The Maitreya chapter of Saṃdhinirmocana is probably the most difficult to
understand if one is not familiar with Buddhist practice. Lamotte translates
manasikāra with “réflection,” while Frauwallner uses “Beobachtung” (lit.
“observation”). Both these translation choices obfuscate the meaning of
what the term “directing one’s attention” actually denotes. This is not in
itself a major issue, but if such inaccuracies proliferate in the same passage
or chapter, the meaning of the translation becomes unclear, although it may
well be technically correct on a syntactic level and lexicographical
perspective (at least when it comes to correctly identifying Tibetan technical
terms on the basis of the Sanskrit).

i.45

In the context of pre-Dignāgean Buddhist logic, chapter 10 represents
another case in point. This chapter is indeed replete with abstruse concepts
not belonging to the well-researched and documented later systems of
Buddhist logic. In this case, translating the many occurrences of the
connective particle kyi in long compounds with the English preposition “of”
will not help the reader much, though it will certainly give the translators the
peace of mind of having produced a “technically correct” translation.
However, I believe that translators have only two options here: (a) take a risk
and, for example, tell us if they actually understand the connective kyi in the
sense of “belonging to,” “resulting from,” “consisting of,” and so on; or (b)
admit that they do not understand the source text. In the case of the
technical compounds found in chapter 10, I therefore tried to ask myself
what these terms actually referred to, what could have been the system of
logic presented in these pages. For example, I read gzhan gyi rigs kyi dpe nye
bar sbyar ba’i mtshan nyid (anyajātīyadṛṣṭāntopasaṃhāralakṣaṇa)26 as rendering
into Tibetan a Sanskrit bahuvrīhi. As a consequence, I translated this long
compound with “[The logical proof] characterized by a demonstration
through an instance belonging to a different class [of phenomena]”

i.46

It goes without saying that these translations are at this stage provisional,
as further research on the subject matter is necessary. But in order to
translate these technical terms, we cannot just give a technically correct

translation of a succession of words. Beyond the first phase of the work,
which is purely analytical, we still need to develop a mental representation
of the situation presented in the text by establishing relations with a context
that might go beyond the text.
i.47

3. In the third operation, Billeter insists on the necessity for translators to
become writers. They should formulate in the target language their
understanding of the source text as accurately and naturally as possible. At
this stage, translators should focus on literary elements of the translation,
such as idioms, voice, and figures of speech. According to Billeter, difficulties
in writing accurately and naturally in the target language are often the direct
consequence of not having performed the second operation. The translation
might well be technically correct, but it still does not make sense, an
experience all translators go through when they fail to understand the
meaning (or visualize the situation) referred to by the source text.

i.48

4. In the fourth operation, translators should reflect on the role played by
linguistic constraints and conventions in the formulation of the source text
as well as those imposed by the target language. What options did the
author of the text have in terms of expression? How would someone express
the same ideas in the target language? As a consequence, the notion of form
and pragmatics in the target language becomes central. To detail the various
operations leading to an actual translation, Vinay and Darbelnet’s model is
useful.27 Translators should first identify the units of translation in relation to
the translation process: the lexicon (e.g., semantic values, objective and
affective aspects, lexical associations and modulations), the syntactic
structure (e.g., transpositions between word classes, supplementation of
pronouns or conjunctions, modifications in terms of gender, number,
characterization, tenses, voice, modality, and verbal aspects), and the
message (e.g., meaning, stylistics, pragmatics, topicalization, figures of
speech, metalinguistic aspects, specific segmentation of reality). Then, they
should examine the descriptive, affective, and intellectual content of the
units of translation in the source text to reconstitute the situation at the
origin of the message. These two first steps correspond to Billeter’s two first
operations. Finally, translators still have to formulate the message in the
target language without omitting any relevant element from the source
language.

i.49

To achieve this, Vinay and Darbelnet argue that translators have only two
methods: direct and oblique translation. Direct translation includes three
strategies:

• a. Borrowing: the term in the source language is used in the target
language to overcome an insuperable metalinguistic lacuna, or it is used
because the term is also commonly used in the target language. For
instance, I use the Sanskrit bodhisattva and nirvāṇa in my English
translation.
• b. Calque: I translated bodhicitta with “awakening mind,” which is both a
lexical and structural calque.
• c. Literal translation: most lists and simple sentences are for instance
relatively unproblematic direct translations of the source language.
i.50

When a Literal translation fails to render the message, is structurally
impossible, or misleads the reader due to the lack of a corresponding
expression belonging to the same register, one should turn to an oblique
translation method among the following strategies:
• d. Transposition: one replaces a word class by another. For example, the
frequent nominalizations of Sanskrit and Tibetan are turned into verb
clauses. The highly technical nature of some terms makes it necessary to
reflect the Sanskrit as much as possible while “unpacking” what is a
condensed

compound.

As

an

illustration,

I

translated

tadanyavairūpyopalabdhi with “a perception that does not conform with
anything other than the [thing to establish],” in which vairūpya is
translated as a verb.
Our text is mostly written in the same way as a treatise (śāstra), reflecting
what is referred to as the nominal style in Sanskrit, or scholastic Sanskrit,
in which the nominalization of verbal clauses by means of compounds or
suffixes is common. As is often the case in technical or hyperspecialized
environments, processes or conceptual frameworks are encapsulated as
technical terms (often nouns) implying a complex or recurring pattern. As
an analogy, think of a medical term such as hemiglossectomy standing for
a removal of a part of the tongue. The passive impersonal phrase “a
hemiglossectomy was performed on the patient at 11 pm” includes the
nominalization of an action through a compound (hemiglossectomy). It
could be rewritten as “[the surgeon] removed a portion of the patient’s
tongue at 11 pm.” As can be seen from the translations of Lamotte and
Frauwallner, nominalization seems to be less of a problem in French and
German than it is in modern (American) English in which readability is
more of a concern. When translating the Saṃdhinirmocana, I therefore tried
to turn nominal compounds common in scholastic Sanskrit into English
verbal sentences by transposing these compounds into verbal sentences.
However, since the text is very technical (particularly from Chapter 7
onward), I decided in some cases to keep nominal compounds that were

indicative of a technical term and not just a nontechnical action or state of
affairs. For example, the text mentions throughout a “concept” being
referred to a “X” (see for instance 7.3–6). Just like the surgical term above,
such complex nominal compounds stand for a specific action or concept
and are part of a “specialist’s jargon.” Turning these compounds into
verbal sentences might have the counterproductive effect of erasing an
essential feature of this kind of literature consisting in endless lists of
often technical terms. Therefore, in this particular case, it would probably
be best to avoid transposition.
• e. Modulation: this strategy implies a change of perspective or
standpoint made in order to avoid an awkward rendering of the source
language. In its simplest form, translating sla ba ma yin (D, folio 25.b, 7.32)
with “it is difficult” is an illustration of an optional modulation. Any
change of syntactic subject for the sake of clarifying a sentence would be a
modulation. Whether this decision is appropriate or not on the part of the
translator is something that one should evaluate on a case-by-case basis.
I would like to illustrate this point with issues related to the nidāna of the
sūtra, in which topicalization plays an important role. The first paragraph
of the prologue is a presentation of the place where the Buddha is
dwelling. The topicalization of the temple (khang) is achieved through a
succession of compounds, mainly bahuvrīhis. Lamotte’s translation
reflects this thematization to perfection. In contrast, Powers fails to
topicalize the palace to the same degree. In his translation, the logical
subject of the several clauses describing this palace is sometimes
ambiguous. In this case, one should consider the fact that the Sanskrit
structure of this paragraph is built on a process of topicalization that we
can easily render in English. In a word, we have no reason to alter this
literary device by inducing a modulation of the translation through a
change of perspective induced, for example, by a modification of the
grammatical or logical subject in the target language.
• f. Equivalence: the same situation can be expressed both in the source
language and the target language in completely different stylistic and
structural ways due to the necessity to resort to idioms in order to convey
the message of the source text. For example, I translated evam etat (de de
bzhin te/no) literally with “so it is” in English, which is a slightly pompous
and old-fashioned expression no one would probably use today. Instead,
one would probably say in an actual dialogue something like “You are
right, Dharmodgata” or “This is true, Dharmodgata.”28
• g. Adaptation: this method aims at replacing altogether a reference to a
situation in the source language if it is completely unknown in the target
language. I generally try to avoid adaptations while translating, for the

simple reason that one has to be certain that, for instance, two different
metaphors or examples refer to the same situation or object.
To conclude on this point, it seems to me that a number of fixed or
technical expressions in the Kangyur could be translated in a systematic
way following Vinay and Darbelnet’s approach. This research would
establish a set of solid conventions that would improve accuracy and
readability.
i.51

Returning to Billeter’s schema, in his fourth operation the translator should
verify that what has been translated into the target language corresponds to
the meaning of the source text. Do the two texts express the same idea? Do
they produce the same effect on the reader? To answer these questions,
Billeter recommends reading one’s text aloud. During this operation,
translators should also check whether the translation fits within a specific
cultural register in the target language. Discourses take place within a
corpus of existing literature that is culturally determined by centuries of
textual production. Some statements from a different cultural background
resonate through a web of meaning, discursive practices, or literary figures
of speech once expressed in the target language. In fact, the web of meaning
of the target language within which the translation is received finds its
parallel in the web of meaning within which the source text was produced.
Within the source text and culture, concepts, ideas, and references resonate
throughout sentences, paragraphs, chapters, works, and genres. For
example, some philosophical definitions can represent intratextual and
extratextual variations on a theme for which there is no metalinguistic
context in the target language. Translators therefore need to understand the
text not only as a whole and in relation to its various components, but also in
connection with both the source and the target cultures. This is of course
particularly true of more “philosophical” texts for which it is essential to
evaluate how the translation interacts with the webs of meaning of the
source and target cultures. Practically, it is important to cross check the
consistency (or lack thereof) of meaning units across the text while keeping
in mind that the translation is also obviously culturally situated. This process
is fundamental because it facilitates the validation (or invalidation) of
translation hypotheses resulting from the two first steps of the translation
process.

i.52

In the context of Saṃdhinirmocana, the problem is compounded by the fact
that the sūtra can be read as a collection of independent texts that would
have been put together during the third or fourth century ᴄᴇ. The academic
community considers the sūtra as a highly composite compilation lacking
coherence from a philological perspective.29 Lamotte explains that the first
four chapters represent a Prajñāpāramitā for the reasons mentioned above. He

sees chapters 5 through 7 as forming a second group of ideas found in the
Prajñāpāramitā literature that influenced the Yogācāra school. Finally, he
considers chapters 8 through 10 to be later additions.
i.53

It is undeniable that the various recensions in Tibetan and Chinese refer to
texts that are quite different in structure. For instance, Paramārtha’s
translation includes only the first four chapters, which, according to Lamotte,
might have originally formed an independent sūtra. In addition, it is obvious
that the ten chapters of Saṃdhinirmocana do not follow a consistent textual
pattern. The first six have no title. They are concluded by a few summarizing
gāthās and a standard formula indicating the name of the person who
questioned the Buddha and the number of the chapter (e.g., “This was the
chapter of Guṇākara—the sixth chapter”). Chapter 7 has a whole summary
of the chapter in the form of a supplement right after the concluding gāthās,
while in chapter 10 the Buddha is questioned on complementary topics once
the concluded gāthās have been proclaimed. Chapters 7, 8, 9, and 10 each
come to an end with a nītārthanirdeśa (instruction of definitive meaning) on
the chapter topic. This nītārthanirdeśa is referred to as a Saṃdhinirmocana and
used as the chapter title. On account of this, Lamotte surmises that there
might have originally been several independent Saṃdhinirmocanasūtras that
came to be grouped together as the text we know today.

i.54

One should also note that the dialogue structure of chapters 1 through 7
differs from that of chapters 8 through 10. In the first group, the Buddha
elaborates on a topic in the form of a monologue once his interlocutor has
questioned him on a specific topic, whereas in the second group a dialogue
takes place through short questions and answers. As a consequence of all
these philological divergences, one has to conclude that the text is rather
composite in nature and probably the result of a succession of additions and
adjustments. In a word, I agree with Schmithausen that Saṃdhinirmocana is
not an organic whole that would have been composed from the onset in its
present form and that its chapters are not mutually dependent.30 However,
this hypothesis should ideally be the object of further research by a team
following an approach similar to that of Professor Jonathan Silk’s European
Research Council project “Open Philology — The Composition of Buddhist
Scriptures” at the University of Leiden, to which I have had the good fortune
to take part. The multiformity and intertextuality of Mahāyāna sūtras are not
the result of a linear development from an Ur-text but the expression of oralformulaic processes of composition and transmission. For our research
program focusing on the Ratnakūṭa collection of sūtras, we have been
developing digital and philological tools to identify, analyze, and map the
fluidity and modularity of Mahāyāna texts. By using these tools, we could

better understand the historical development of the complex textual
environment of the Saṃdhinirmocana, which includes several translations and
many witnesses of this work.
i.55

From the perspective of the narrative and doctrinal content of the Tibetan
translation, a somewhat different picture emerges. Even if each chapter does
not depend on all others in terms of meaning, there is definitely a
progression with regard to the flow of thought in Saṃdhinirmocana insofar as
later chapters do depend on the definitions and lines of thinking posited in
the former chapters, a central fact for translators of this complex text. We can
perceive this continuity in the intratextual cross-references that create a
terminological resonance echoing throughout the text. Unraveling these
cross-references is as important during the translation process as noting the
textual variations indicating a deviation from a specific literary pattern.
While translating I thus tried to evaluate the text in terms of regularities and
discontinuities in the use of definitions and the flow of meaning unfolding
throughout the text. One should therefore temper the impression that the
text has been “patched” together on the basis of loosely related texts on the
basis of philological arguments whose significance is difficult to assess. For
example, the fact that chapter 1 is the only chapter in which a dialogue
occurs between two bodhisattvas has never been mentioned by any
researcher as a textual inconsistency preventing them from considering the
first four chapters as a coherent whole. Minor divergences should therefore
not deter us from asking ourselves why these chapters were taught or put
together in the first place. I would like to illustrate with a few concrete
examples the doctrinal coherence of the text. The term ādānavijñāna in 5.3 is
also found in 8.37.1.i; the model of the three kinds of essencelessness (niḥsvabhāvatā) of chapter 7 corresponds to the model of the three defining
characteristics (lakṣaṇa) of chapter 6, of which two are foreshadowed in 1.2
through the terms parikalpa (kun tu rtog pa) and *apariniṣpanna (yongs su ma grub
pa); the other-dependent defining characteristic (paratantralakṣaṇa) introduced
in chapter 6 is mentioned in 7.10; chapter 8 presupposes chapters 5 and 6;31
the concluding paragraphs of 7.33 and 8.41 are almost identical; as noted by
Schmithausen, saṃskāranimitta is referred to in similar ways in both 1.5 and
7.25–27;32 *viśuddhyālambana is mentioned with the same function in 4.8, 7.6,
7.25–27, and 8.20; 10.7.2 refers to the seven aspects of true reality (tathatā)
defined in 8.20.2; 8.21 and 10.7.4.ii contain the same formulation; the famous
quote “Whether tathāgatas…” is found in 4.10, 7.9, and 10.7.4.vii.d; 10.9
mentions the enumeration citta, manas, and vijñāna exactly in the way it is
expressed in 5.1–6; 10.9 enumerates the domains as in 8.23.

i.56

On account of the elements adduced above and with Davidson’s principle
of charity in mind, I would like to formulate the hypothesis that there is a
good reason why these chapters are found in this order: the structure of the
text as we know it today is necessary to provide Mahāyāna practitioners
with a systematic teaching on (1) ultimate reality qua basis, which is the
nondual inexpressible domain of gnosis (chapters 1 through 4), (2) the path
to awakening from the domain of mind to the domain of gnosis (chapters 5
through 9), and (3) ultimate reality qua result of the path, which represents a
shift in one’s basis of existence as one attains the domain of gnosis (chapter
10).

i.57

Indeed, it seems impossible to deny that, considered as a single text (and
not as a succession of independent texts), the Saṃdhinirmocana aims at
providing a systematic teaching on the Single Vehicle through the three
aspects of basis, path, and result in order to solve seeming contradictions
and quandaries in doctrines that were of primary importance for followers of
the Great Vehicle (e.g., the two truths in chapter 3 and meditative practice in
chapter 8). Now, if we read the Saṃdhinirmocana as a single text, we have to
confront the web of meaning found in this text in its entirety with the web of
meaning of the target culture in order to avoid potential misunderstandings.

i.58

This operation has a major impact on the translation of some key terms,
such as vijñaptimātra. Since idealism (in the sense that mind is an unchanging
essence) is not an option given the teaching imparted in this sūtra, I tried to
avoid any potential confusion resulting from an unfortunate choice of
terminology. In a word, I would rather stay on the safe side than insert in my
translation a potentially misleading term. As a consequence, I decided to
translate vijñaptimātra as “a mere representation” instead of using
nominalizations such as “cognition-only.” The first expression is relatively
unambiguous

in

the

target

culture

as

it

minimizes

the

risk

of

misunderstanding the message of the text. Another option would be “just a
representation.” These formulations mitigate the risk of superimposing an
essence on what is meant by vijñapti.33 The formulation “cognition-only” in
the sense of “pure cognition” is in contrast ambivalent. It could also (but not
necessarily) signify that only cognition truly exists and by extension, that
only mind exists as an essence.
i.59

In the last step of the translation process, Billeter recommends that
translators perform various operations aiming at polishing the translation,
such as replicating the possible effects of semantic resonance throughout
the text, improving the connection between sentences and paragraphs,
modifying the order of clauses, solving problems of euphony, or editing the
translation to make it clearer and simpler by chunking long sentences or
eliminating repetitions. To illustrate one of these various tasks in the context

of the present project, I decided to review all the terminology pertaining to
the semantic field of insight (vipaśyanā) after I had finished translating the
entire text. I took as a starting point 8.4, in which vipaśyanā is defined by
means of a series of technical terms, such as pratyavekṣaṇa, vibhājanā, pravicaya,
paritarka, parimīmāṃsā, nitīraṇa, and vitarka. I first tried to find the best
translation for each term in the context of this chapter. Next, I checked the
usage of all these terms and other related concepts (e.g., pratisaṃkhyā)
throughout the text to standardize the corresponding English terminology. I
also tried to minimize the use of square brackets indicating additions to the
text when these additions were logically implied by the source text. A
typology of such situations would include various operations, such as
breaking down a compound, clarifying an abbreviated form corresponding
to a well-attested collocation, stating a logical subject, object, or verb that is
elided in the source text, mentioning the number of a technical term that
usually comes as a list of individual items.
i.60

Through all these operations, my aim has been to maximize both accuracy
and readability while maintaining the consistency of the very systematic
presentation of the Great Vehicle developed in the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra.
This text is important in this spiritual tradition since it condenses all aspects
of Mahāyāna. I hope that this translation will contribute to improve our
understanding of the interplay between liberation as a path and primordial
freedom as the ground of being.

The Translation

The Noble Great Vehicle Sūtra

Unraveling the Intent

p.

Prologue
[F.1.b]

p.1

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in an
unfathomable palace, built with the blazing seven precious substances,34
that emitted35 great light rays suffusing countless universes.36 Each of its
rooms was well arranged and its design was infinite. It was the undivided
maṇḍala, the domain transcending the three worlds. Arising from the
supreme roots of virtue of the one who transcends the world,37 it was
characterized by the perfectly pure cognition of the one who has achieved
complete mastery.38 Abode of the Tathāgata where the assembly of
innumerable bodhisattvas gathered, it was attended by countless gods,
nāgas, [F.2.a] yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas,
humans, and nonhumans. Supported by the great joy and bliss of savoring
the Dharma and designed to accomplish the complete welfare of all beings, it
was free of any harm caused by the stains of afflictions and clear of any
demon. Surpassing all manifestations, this unfathomable palace was
displayed by the sovereign power of the Tathāgata. Mindfulness,
intelligence, and realization were its pathway;39 mental stillness and insight
were the vehicle leading to it; the great gates of liberation—emptiness,
appearancelessness, and wishlessness —were its entrance. It was set on
foundations adorned with an infinite accumulation of excellent qualities,
which were like great kings of jeweled lotuses.40

p.2

The Blessed One had a perfectly realized mind and was free from dualistic
behavior. Absorbed in the Dharma of the nonexistence of defining
characteristics, he was residing in the domain of the buddhas. He had
attained equality with all buddhas. His realization was unobstructed and his
qualities 41 were irreversible. He could not be overcome by objects of
experience.42 His abode was inconceivable.43 Perfectly skilled in the

sameness of the three times,44 his five bodies were present in all worlds. His
knowledge of all phenomena was free from doubt. He understood all
practices. His knowledge of phenomena was without uncertainty. [F.2.b] His
body was unimaginable. He possessed the gnosis bodhisattvas vow to
accomplish.45 He had attained the nondual abode of the buddhas, the
sublime perfection, the supreme indivisible gnosis of the Tathāgata’s
liberation.46 He had realized the sameness [of all phenomena], the state of a
buddha in which there is neither a center nor a periphery,47 and reached the
ultimate within the domain of truth, the point where the sphere of space
ends.48
p.3

The Blessed One was accompanied by the entire immeasurable assembly
of hearers. Children of noble family, they were the heirs of the Buddha. Their
minds were liberated, their wisdom was emancipated, and their discipline
was completely pure. They happily gathered with those who longed for the
Dharma. They had heard much, kept in mind what they had heard, and
accumulated [merit from] what they had heard. They excelled in thought,
speech, and deeds. Their wisdom was swift, quick, sharp, emancipating,49
discerning,50 vast, extensive, profound, and unequaled. They possessed the
jewel of wisdom and the three forms of knowledge. They had attained the
supreme state of happiness in this life. The purity of their merit,51 the
excellence of their peaceful conduct, their patience, and their gentleness
were vast.52 They were fully engaged in the teaching of the Tathāgata.

p.4

The Blessed One was also accompanied by all the innumerable
bodhisattvas assembled from various buddha realms. Firmly settled and
engaged in a vast state, they had gone forth through the Dharma of the
Great Vehicle. Impartial toward all beings, they were free from all
conceptions, conceptualizations, and fabrications. Victorious over all demons
and opposition, they were not involved with the considerations of the
hearers and solitary realizers. [F.3.a] Steadfast through the great joy and
happiness of savoring the Dharma, they were free from the five great fears.
Solely progressing toward the stages from which there is no regression, they
had perfectly actualized the stage in which one pacifies the torment of
beings. Among them were thus the bodhisattva mahāsattvas Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana, Vidhivatparipṛcchaka, Dharmodgata, Suviśuddhamati,
Viśālamati, Guṇākara, Paramārthasamudgata, Āryāvalokiteśvara, Maitreya,
and Mañjuśrī.

1.

CHAPTER 1

1.1

At that time, the bodhisattva Vidhivatparipṛcchaka questioned the
bodhisattva Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana on the ultimate whose defining
characteristic is inexpressible and nondual:53 “O son of the Victorious One,
when it is said that all phenomena are nondual, what are these phenomena?
In what way are they nondual?”
Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana replied, “Noble son, all phenomena, what
we refer to as all phenomena, are of just two kinds: conditioned and
unconditioned. With respect to these, the conditioned is neither conditioned
nor unconditioned. The unconditioned is neither unconditioned nor
conditioned.”

1.2

Vidhivatparipṛcchaka inquired, “O son of the Victorious One, why is the
conditioned neither conditioned nor unconditioned and the unconditioned
neither unconditioned nor conditioned?”
Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana

answered,

“Noble

son,

the

term

conditioned is a word, a label used by the Teacher. Words that are labels used
by the Teacher are conventional expressions arising from imagination. These
conventional expressions arising from imagination are always unreal54
conventional expressions arising from imagination in its diversity. Therefore,
the term conditioned is not the conditioned. [F.3.b] Noble son, the term
unconditioned is also included within conventions, just as expressions other
than conditioned and unconditioned are and will [always] be. One might object
that there is, however, no expression in the absence of the object [to which it
refers]. What is then this object? It is the complete and perfect awakening to
inexpressible [reality] through the sublime gnosis and vision55 of the noble
ones.56 But in order57 to lead [others] to the perfect realization of this very
inexpressible nature of phenomena, the Teacher labels this object with the
term conditioned.

1.3

“Noble son, the term unconditioned is also a word, a label used by the
Teacher. Words that are labels used by the Teacher are conventional
expressions arising from imagination.58 These conventional expressions
arising from imagination are always conventional expressions deprived of
any actuality that arise from imagination in its diversity. Therefore, the term
unconditioned is not the unconditioned. Noble son, the term conditioned is also
included within conventions, just as expressions other than conditioned and
unconditioned are and will [always] be. One might object that there is,
however, no expression in the absence of the object [to which it refers]. What
is then this object? It is the complete and perfect awakening to inexpressible
[reality] through the sublime gnosis and vision of the noble ones. But in
order to lead [others] to the perfect realization of this very inexpressible
nature of phenomena, the Teacher labels this object with the term
unconditioned.”

1.4

Vidhivatparipṛcchaka asked, “O son of the Victorious One, as the noble
ones completely and perfectly awaken to inexpressible [reality] through
their sublime gnosis and perception, why do they [F.4.a] label this object
with the terms conditioned and unconditioned in order to lead [others] to the
perfect realization of this very inexpressible nature of phenomena?”
Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana replied, “Noble son, it is like the
following example: A magician or his skillful apprentice, finding himself at
the juncture of four great roads, assembles grass, leaves, twigs, pebbles, or
stones and produces all kinds of magic illusions, such as regiments of
elephants, horses, chariots, and soldiers or collections of jewels, pearls, beryl,
seashells, crystal, and coral, as well as an abundance of wealth and grain in
treasuries and granaries. At that time, in the presence of these illusions,
those who are naive, slow-witted, or confused, not perceiving the grass,
leaves, twigs, pebbles, or stones, see and hear those magical tricks and think
that whatever appears exists —that these regiments of elephants, horses,
chariots, and soldiers or collections of jewels, pearls, beryl, seashells, crystal,
and coral, as well as this abundance of wealth and grain, treasuries and
granaries, exist. Clinging to these magical illusions according to the way
they see and hear things and strongly believing in them, they express
themselves through conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is
false.’ They still need to examine these illusions.
“Those who are not naive or confused but have wisdom perceive the
grass, leaves, twigs, pebbles, or stones. They see and hear those magical
tricks and understand that whatever appears does not exist—that these
regiments of elephants, horses, chariots, and soldiers or collections of jewels,
pearls, beryl, seashells, crystal, and coral, as well as this abundance of wealth
and grain, treasuries and granaries, do not exist. [F.4.b] Yet, they understand

that the conception of an elephant regiment exists since its manifestation as
a conception through an expedient59 exists, as do the manifestations as
conceptions of regiments of horses, chariots, and soldiers or collections of
jewels, pearls, beryl, seashells, crystal, and coral, as well as this abundance of
wealth and grain, treasuries and granaries, together with other similar
manifestations. So they understand that all those magical illusions, these
magic illusions deceiving the eye, exist [in the way magical illusions do].60
Thinking in this way, [these wise beings] do not express themselves through
conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is false,’ on account of
clinging to these magical illusions in the way they see and hear things and
thus strongly believing in them.61 However, they do express themselves
through conventions in order to convey the true nature 62 [of these illusions
to others], although they do not need to further examine these illusions.63
1.5

Likewise, some childish or ordinary beings have not attained the
transcendent sublime wisdom. They have not understood that the nature of
all phenomena is inexpressible. When those beings perceive conditioned
and unconditioned phenomena, they believe that whatever appears as a
conditioned or unconditioned phenomenon exists, and they express
themselves through conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is
false,’ on account of clinging to these appearances according to the way they
see and hear things and thus strongly believing in them. They still need to
examine these appearances.
“With regard to this, some beings who are not childish and have seen the
truth have attained the transcendent sublime wisdom. They have
understood that the nature of all phenomena is inexpressible. When they
perceive conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, they believe that
whatever appears as a conditioned or unconditioned phenomenon does not
exist. However, with respect to these appearances, they think that the
conceptions in terms of conditioned and unconditioned, [F.5.a] the
manifestation of conceptions through an expedient in terms of conditioned
and

unconditioned,

the

occurrence

of

conceptualization,

and

the

phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena exist in the way magical
illusions do. That which deludes the mind exists [in the way magical
illusions do].64 Thinking in that way, they do not express themselves
through conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is false,’ on
account of clinging to these appearances according to the way they see and
hear things and thus strongly believing in them. However, they do express
themselves through conventions in order to convey the true nature [of these
appearances to others], although they do not need to further examine these
appearances.

“Noble son, the noble ones are thus completely and perfectly awakened to
inexpressible [reality] through their sublime gnosis and vision of this object,
but in order to lead [others] to the perfect realization of this very
inexpressible nature of phenomena, they label this object with the terms
conditioned and unconditioned.”
1.6

At that time, the bodhisattva Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana recited these
verses:
“The profound, which is inaccessible to foolish beings,
Inexpressible and nondual, has been taught by the Victorious One.
Yet, fools deluded by ignorance
Take delight in mental elaborations and dwell on duality.
“Deprived of understanding, afflicted by misunderstanding,
They will be reborn as sheep or oxen.
Casting aside the words of the wise,
They will wander in saṃsāra for a great length of time.”
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana—the first
chapter.

2.

CHAPTER 2

2.1

Then the bodhisattva Dharmodgata spoke these words: “Blessed One, very
long ago in ancient times, beyond as many universes as there are grains of
sand in seventy-seven Ganges rivers, I was residing in the world Kīrtimat of
the tathāgata Viśālakīrti. There I saw 7,700,000 non-Buddhists, together with
their teachers, who had gathered in one place to consider the ultimate
defining characteristic of phenomena.65 [F.5.b] Although they had examined,
analyzed, investigated, and considered in detail the ultimate defining
characteristic of phenomena, they did not understand it. They had changing
opinions, lacked certainty, and were slow-witted as well as argumentative.
Insulting one another with harsh words, they became abusive, agitated,
unprincipled, and violent. Then, Blessed One, I thought to myself, ‘This is so
sad, and yet, how marvelous, how wonderful are the manifestations of the
tathāgatas in the world and, through their manifestations, the realization and
actualization of the ultimate whose defining characteristic is beyond all
speculation!’ ”66

2.2

The Blessed One answered to the bodhisattva Dharmodgata: “So it is,
Dharmodgata. So it is. I have completely and perfectly awakened to the
ultimate characterized as being beyond all speculation. Yet,67 after I attained
complete and perfect awakening, I communicated through words, gave
explanations,

established

distinctions,

expressed

myself

through

conventions, and imparted teachings. One might ask why I did this. I have
explained that the ultimate is what is cognized by noble beings in a personal
and intuitive way,68 whereas ordinary beings’ knowledge [resulting from
interacting] with one another belongs to the domain of speculation.69
Therefore, Dharmodgata, you should know in this way through this
approach that the ultimate is what is characterized as transcending all
speculation. Moreover, Dharmodgata, I have explained that the ultimate
represents the domain in which there is no phenomenal appearance,70
whereas speculation is the domain of phenomenal appearance. Therefore,

Dharmodgata, you should know in this way through this approach that the
[F.6.a] ultimate is what is characterized as transcending all speculation.
Moreover, Dharmodgata, I have explained that the ultimate is inexpressible,
whereas speculation is the domain of verbalization. Therefore, Dharmodgata,
you should know in this way through this approach that the ultimate is what
is characterized as transcending all speculation. Moreover, Dharmodgata, I
have explained that the ultimate is free from all conventions, whereas
speculation is the domain of conventions. Therefore, Dharmodgata, you
should know in this way through this approach that the ultimate is what is
characterized as transcending all speculation. Moreover, Dharmodgata, I
have explained that the ultimate is devoid of argumentative disputation,
whereas speculation is the domain of argumentative disputation. Therefore,
Dharmodgata, you should know in this way through this approach that the
ultimate is what is characterized as transcending all speculation.71
2.3

“Dharmodgata, it is like this: beings who have only tasted pungent or
bitter flavors their entire lives cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the taste of
honey and sugar. Those who have indulged in desire and have been burnt
by the torment of desire for a long time cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate
the inner happiness of the recluse, which is independent from all
phenomenal appearances related to form, sound, smell, taste, and contact.
Those who have indulged and taken delight in conversations for a long time
cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the inner happiness of the noble beings
who remain silent. Those who have indulged and taken delight in
conventions for a long time through seeing, hearing, discriminating, and
cognizing cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the cessation of all
conventions, the nirvāṇa that is the [F.6.b] extinction of transitory
aggregates. Dharmodgata, it is like this: Those who have indulged and taken
delight in argumentative disputations for a long time on account of their
attachment to the self cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate that there is no
attachment to the self and no argumentative disputations in Uttarakuru.
“Dharmodgata, likewise, those who [have indulged for a long time in]
speculation cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the ultimate whose defining
characteristic transcends all speculation.”

2.4

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“It is the domain whose characteristic must be intuitively cognized,
Beyond all expressions, apart from all conventions,
And free from argumentative disputations — 72
Such is the ultimate whose characteristic transcends all speculation.”73
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Dharmodgata—the second chapter.

3.

CHAPTER 3

3.1

Then the bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati addressed the Blessed One, “Blessed
One, at an earlier time, you spoke these words: ‘The ultimate is subtle and
profound. Characterized as transcending what is distinct or indistinct74 [from
conditioned phenomena], it is difficult to understand.’ How wonderful
indeed are these words of yours! Blessed One, regarding this point, I once
saw many bodhisattvas who, having attained the stage of engagement
through aspiration,75 assembled in one place to discuss in the following way
whether conditioned phenomena and the ultimate are distinct or indistinct.
Among them, some declared, ‘The defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are indistinct.’76
Others replied, ‘It is not the case that the defining characteristic of
conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are
indistinct, for they are distinct indeed.’ [F.7.a] Some others, who were
perplexed and lacked certainty, said, ‘Some pretend that the defining
characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of
the ultimate are distinct. Some pretend that they are indistinct. Which
bodhisattvas speak the truth? Which speak falsity? Which are mistaken?
Which are not?’ Blessed One, I thought to myself, ‘So, none of these noble
sons understands the ultimate whose subtle defining characteristic
transcends whether it is distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena.
These bodhisattvas are truly77 naive, confused, dull, unskilled, and
mistaken.’ ”

3.2

The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati, “So it is, Suviśuddhamati. So it is. Indeed, none of these noble sons understands the
ultimate whose subtle defining characteristic transcends whether it is
distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena. These [bodhisattvas] are
truly naive, confused, dull, unskilled, and mistaken. Why is this so? Suviśuddhamati, it is because those who analyze conditioned phenomena in
this way neither realize nor actualize the ultimate.

3.3

“Why? Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were indistinct,
[even] spiritually immature people —all ordinary beings —would, as a
consequence, realize the truth. As mere ordinary beings,78 [F.7.b] not only
would they attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good,79 but they would also
fully and completely awaken to unsurpassable complete and perfect
awakening.
“If the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate were distinct, even those who realize the truth
would, as a consequence, not be detached from the phenomenal
appearances of conditioned phenomena. Since they would not be detached
from the phenomenal appearances of conditioned phenomena, they would
also not be liberated from the bondage of phenomenal appearances. If they
were not liberated from the bondage of phenomenal appearances, they
would not be liberated from the bondage of corruption. If they were not
liberated from these two kinds of bondage, those who realize the truth
would neither attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, nor fully and
completely awaken to the unsurpassable complete and perfect awakening.
“Suviśuddhamati, ordinary beings do not realize the truth and,80 as mere
ordinary beings, neither do they attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, nor
do they fully and completely awaken to the unsurpassable complete and
perfect awakening. For these reasons, it is not correct to say that the defining
characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of
the ultimate are indistinct. Regarding this point, you should know through
this approach that those who consider the defining characteristic of
conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate to be
indistinct are not right but wrong.
“Suviśuddhamati, it is not the case that those who realize the truth are not
detached from the phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena, for
they are indeed detached from it.81 Neither are they not liberated from the
bondage of phenomenal appearance, for they are indeed liberated from it.
Nor are they not liberated from the bondage of corruption, for they are
indeed liberated from it. Since they are liberated from these two kinds of
bondage, [F.8.a] not only do they attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, but
they will also fully and completely awaken to the unsurpassable complete
and perfect awakening.82 For all these reasons, it is not correct to say that the
defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate are distinct. Regarding this point, you should
know through this approach that those who consider the defining
characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of
the ultimate to be distinct are not right but wrong.

3.4

“Moreover, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were indistinct,
then, just as the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena is
encompassed by the defining characteristic of affliction, so too would the
defining characteristic of the ultimate be included in the defining
characteristic of affliction.
“However, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were distinct,
then the defining characteristic of the ultimate could not be the universal
defining characteristic within all the defining characteristics of conditioned
phenomena.
“Suviśuddhamati, the defining characteristic of the ultimate is not
encompassed by the defining characteristic of affliction, and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate is the universal defining characteristic within all
the defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena. For these reasons, it
is not correct to say that the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are either
indistinct or distinct. Regarding this point, you should know through this
approach that those pretending that the defining characteristic of
conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are
indistinct or distinct are not right but wrong.

3.5

“Moreover, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were not distinct,
[F.8.b] then, just as the defining characteristic of the ultimate is not specific to
any defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena, so too would all
defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena not be specific to any
conditioned phenomenon, and yogis would also not look for the ultimate
beyond whatever they see, hear, distinguish, or know with regard to
conditioned phenomena.83
“However, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were distinct,
then, the mere selflessness and essencelessness of conditioned phenomena
would not be the defining characteristic of the ultimate. The defining
characteristic of affliction and the defining characteristic of purity
themselves would be simultaneously established as distinct defining
characteristics of conditioned phenomena.
“Suviśuddhamati, the defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena
are specific and not unspecific to conditioned phenomena; yogis do look for
the ultimate beyond whatever they see, hear, distinguish, or know with
regard to conditioned phenomena; the ultimate is indeed characterized by
the mere selflessness and essencelessness of conditioned phenomena; and

the defining characteristic of affliction and the defining characteristic of
purity also are not simultaneously established as distinct defining
characteristics of conditioned phenomena. For all these reasons, it is not
correct to say that the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and
the defining characteristic of the ultimate are neither indistinct nor distinct.
Regarding this point, you should know through these approaches that those
pretending that the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and
the defining characteristic of the ultimate are indistinct or distinct are not
right but wrong.
3.6

“Suviśuddhamati, it is like this: It is not easy to decide 84 whether the
whiteness of the conch is distinct or indistinct from the defining
characteristic of the conch, likewise with the yellowness of gold. It is not
easy to decide whether the quality of the sound produced by a vīṇā is [F.9.a]
distinct or indistinct from the defining characteristic of sound, likewise with
aloe and its fragrance, pepper and its heat, myrobalan and its astringency,
cotton and its softness, and clarified butter and butter. Thus it is not easy to
decide whether the impermanence of all conditioned phenomena is distinct
or indistinct from the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena,
likewise with the suffering of all beings with outflows and the defining
characteristic of beings with outflows, as well as the selflessness of all
phenomena and the defining characteristic of phenomena.
“Suviśuddhamati, it is like this: It is not easy to decide whether the
defining characteristic of restless desire and the defining characteristic of
afflictions are distinct or indistinct from the defining characteristic of desire.
You should know it is just like this with anger and delusion too. Likewise,
Suviśuddhamati, you should not see anything good85 in deciding whether
the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate are distinct or indistinct. In this way, Suviśuddhamati, I have completely and fully awakened to the ultimate that is
subtle, extremely subtle, [profound], extremely profound, difficult to
understand, extremely difficult to understand, and characterized as
transcending being distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena.86 Yet,
after I attained complete and perfect awakening, I communicated through
words, gave explanations, established distinctions, expressed myself
through conventions, and [F.9.b] imparted teachings.”87

3.7

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“The defining characteristics of the domains of conditioned phenomena and
of the ultimate
Are free from being distinct or indistinct.88
Those who imagine them to be distinct or indistinct are mistaken.

“As beings practice mental stillness and insight,
They will be liberated from the bonds of corruption
And the bonds of phenomenal appearance.”89
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati—the third chapter.

4.

CHAPTER 4

4.1

Then the Blessed One spoke these words to Subhūti: “Subhūti, do you know
how many beings in the world90 display their knowledge 91 under the
influence of conceit? Do you know how many beings in the world display
their knowledge without conceit?”
Subhūti answered, “Blessed One, according to my knowledge, there are
only a few in the world of beings who present their knowledge without
conceit, but countless, innumerable, and inexpressible in number are those
who do so under its influence. Blessed One, at one time I was staying in a
hermitage set in a great forest. There were many monks living in the vicinity
who had also established themselves there. At sunrise, I saw them gather
together. They showed their knowledge and revealed their understanding
by taking various aspects of phenomena as referential objects.92

4.2

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the five aggregates as
referential objects: their phenomenal appearance, their arising, their
disintegration, [F.10.a] their cessation, and the acknowledgment of their
cessation. In the same way, some showed their knowledge by taking the
twelve sense domains as referential objects, some by taking dependent
arising as a referential object. Some showed their knowledge by taking the
four kinds of sustenance as referential objects: their phenomenal
appearance, their arising, their disintegration, their cessation, and the
acknowledgment of their cessation.

4.3

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the four noble truths as
referential objects: their defining characteristic, the comprehension of
suffering, the abandoning of the cause of suffering, the actualization of the
cessation of suffering, and the practice of the path.

4.4

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the eighteen constituents as
referential objects: their phenomenal appearance, their varieties, their
manifoldness, their cessation, and the actualization of their cessation.

4.5

“Some showed their knowledge by taking the four applications of
mindfulness as referential objects: their phenomenal appearance, their
adverse factors, their antidotes, their practice, their arising from having been
non-arisen, their remaining after they arose, and their maintaining,
resuming, or increasing. In the same way, some showed their knowledge by
taking as referential objects the four correct self-restraints, as well as the four
bases of supernatural powers, the five faculties, the five forces, and the
seven branches of awakening. Some showed their knowledge by taking as
referential objects the eight branches of the noble path: [F.10.b] their
phenomenal appearance, the antidotes to their adverse factors, their practice,
their arising from having been non-arisen, their remaining after they arose,
and their maintaining, resuming, or increasing.93

4.6

“Then I thought to myself, ‘These venerable monks displayed their
knowledge by revealing their understanding by taking various aspects of
phenomena as referential objects, but they have not perceived the ultimate,
whose defining characteristic is of a single nature 94 everywhere.’ These
venerable persons have conceit and, without doubt, display their knowledge
under the influence of conceit. Blessed One, at an earlier time, you spoke
these words: ‘The ultimate is subtle, profound, difficult to understand,
extremely difficult to understand, and characterized as being of a single
nature everywhere.’ How wonderful indeed are these very words of yours!
Blessed One, if even those who practice your teaching, such as these beings
who became monks, find it difficult to understand in this way the ultimate
whose defining characteristic is of a single nature everywhere, what need is
there to mention how difficult it is for those outsiders who do not follow
your teaching?”

4.7

The Blessed One replied, “So it is, Subhūti. So it is. I have completely and
fully awakened to the ultimate that, being characterized as being of a single
nature everywhere, is subtle, extremely subtle, profound, extremely
profound, difficult to understand, and extremely difficult to understand. Yet,
after I attained complete and perfect awakening, [F.11.a] I communicated
through words, gave explanations, established distinctions, expressed
myself through conventions, and imparted teachings. One might ask why I
did this.

4.8

“Subhūti, it is because I teach that the ultimate is the referential object
conducive to purification95 within the aggregates, as well as within the
sense domains, dependent arising, the sustenances, the truths, the
constituents, the applications of mindfulness, the self-restraints, the bases of
supernatural powers, the faculties, the forces, the branches of awakening,
and, Subhūti, the eightfold path. This referential object conducive to
purification within the aggregates is of a single nature everywhere and its

defining characteristic is not different from theirs. It is just the same from the
sense domains up to the eightfold path: the referential object conducive to
purification within these various referential objects is of a single nature
everywhere and its defining characteristic is not different from theirs.
Subhūti, through this approach, you should thus know that what is
characterized as being of a single nature everywhere is the ultimate.96
4.9

“Moreover, Subhūti, once renunciants who practice yoga have realized in
reference to a single aggregate the selflessness of phenomena, which is the
ultimate reality,97 they do not look for this ultimate reality, this selflessness,
individually within the other aggregates or in the sense domains, dependent
arising, the sustenances, the truths, the constituents, the applications of
mindfulness, the self-restraints, the bases of supernatural powers, the
faculties, the forces, the branches of awakening, and the eightfold path.
Instead, they rely upon the nondual gnosis 98 that is in accordance with true
reality. Through this alone,99 [F.11.b] they infallibly ascertain and realize the
ultimate, characterized as being of a single nature everywhere. Subhūti,
through this approach, you should thus know that what is characterized as
being of a single nature everywhere is the ultimate.

4.10

“Moreover, Subhūti, if ultimate reality itself, the selflessness of
phenomena, had a defining characteristic distinct [from the defining
characteristics of phenomena] in the way the aggregates, the sense domains,
dependent arising, the sustenances, the truths, the constituents, the
applications of mindfulness, the self-restraints, the bases of supernatural
powers, the faculties, the forces, the branches of awakening, and the
eightfold path have defining characteristics distinct from one another, then,
on account of this, ultimate reality itself, the selflessness of phenomena,
would have causes and arise from causes. If it arose from causes, it would be
conditioned. If it were the conditioned, it would not be the ultimate. If it were
not the ultimate, one would need to look for some other ultimate. Subhūti,
this ultimate, the selflessness of phenomena, does not arise from causes. It is
not conditioned. Neither is it the case that it is not the ultimate. One must
[therefore] not look for an ultimate other than that ultimate. Thus, whether
tathāgatas manifest or not, because it is the case that it permanently and
immutably abides within phenomena, only this nature of phenomena, this
constituent abiding in phenomena, is constant.100 Subhūti, for all these
reasons, you should know through this approach that the ultimate is
characterized as being of a single nature everywhere.

4.11

“Subhūti, it is like this: although there are many varieties of forms with
distinct defining characteristics within space, since space itself is free from
phenomenal appearances, [F.12.a] devoid of conceptions, and without
change, its defining characteristic is of a single nature everywhere. Likewise,

Subhūti, you should know that the ultimate is characterized as being of a
single

nature

everywhere, within

all

phenomena

whose

characteristics are distinct from one another.”
4.12

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“As proclaimed by the buddhas,
This ultimate is not distinct from phenomena,
And its defining characteristic is everywhere of a single nature.
Those who imagine it to be distinct from phenomena
Are conceited and deluded.”
This was the chapter of Subhūti—the fourth chapter.

defining

5.

CHAPTER 5

5.1

Then, the bodhisattva Viśālamati asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
when bodhisattvas who are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and
cognition are called ‘skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition,’
what does it mean?101 When they are designated in this way, what does it
refer to?”
The Blessed One answered, “Viśālamati, you are asking this for the benefit
and happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the
welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, including gods and humans.
Your intention is excellent when questioning the Tathāgata on this specific
point. Therefore, listen, Viśālamati. I will explain to you in which way
bodhisattvas are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition.
“Viśālamati, when such and such beings are reborn and manifest102 in this

5.2

saṃsāra comprised of six destinies, in any class of beings or state of birth, be
it

egg-born,
103

generated,

womb-born,

moisture-born,

[F.12.b]

or

spontaneously

there is first a twofold appropriation: the appropriation of the

physical sense faculties together with their supports, and the appropriation
of mental imprints producing the elaboration of conventional expressions
with regard to phenomenal appearances, names, and conceptualizations. In
dependence upon this twofold appropriation, the mind containing all the
seeds matures, merges [with the embryo], grows, increases, and expands.104
This twofold appropriation occurs in the realm of form but it does not appear
in the realm of the formless.105
5.3

“Viśālamati, this cognition is also called ‘appropriating cognition’ because
it grasps and appropriates the body. It is also called ‘subliminal cognition,’
because it dwells and lies hidden in this body, sharing a common destiny. It
is also called ‘mind,’ because it is accumulated106 and developed by visual
forms, sounds, smells, flavors, tangible objects, and phenomena.107

5.4

“Viśālamati, taking this appropriating cognition as support and basis, the
six kinds of cognition,108 that is, visual, auditive, olfactory, gustatory, tactile,
and mental cognitions, arise. Among these, a visual cognition arises on the
basis of the eye, which is connected with a visual cognition and a visual
form. Simultaneously and in conformity with this visual cognition, a mental
cognition that conceptualizes the object arises at the same time, having the
same object. [Likewise,] Viśālamati, an auditive, olfactory, gustatory, or
tactile cognition arises on the basis of a sense faculty connected to a
cognition, such as the ear, nose, tongue, or body, and a sound, smell, flavor,
or tangible object. Simultaneously and in conformity with this auditive,
olfactory, gustatory, or tactile

cognition, a

mental cognition

that

conceptualizes the object arises at the same time, having the same object. If
only one visual cognition arises at one time, [F.13.a] then only one mental
cognition that conceptualizes the object arises simultaneously, having the
same object. If two, three, four, or five cognitions arise simultaneously, then
also in that case, having the same object as the group of five cognitions, only
one mental cognition that conceptualizes this object arises simultaneously.109
5.5

“Viśālamati, it is like this: If the conditions for the arising of a single wave
in a large stream of water are present, then only one wave arises.110 If the
conditions for the arising of two or many waves are present, then two or
many waves arise.111 However, the river [itself] neither stops as a stream of
water nor becomes exhausted. If the conditions for the arising of a single
reflection in a perfectly polished mirror are present, then only one reflection
arises.112 If the conditions for the arising of two or many reflections are
present, then two or many reflections arise.113 However, the mirror neither
transforms itself into the object corresponding to the reflection nor manifests
reflections by being in close contact [with the reflected objects].114
Viśālamati, similarly, taking this appropriating cognition as support and
basis, as in the examples of the river and the mirror, if the conditions for the
arising of one visual cognition are present, then only one visual cognition
arises. If the conditions for the simultaneous arising of up to five cognitions
are present, then up to five cognitions simultaneously arise.

5.6

“Viśālamati, taking in this way the knowledge 115 of this doctrine as a
support and basis, bodhisattvas are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought,
and cognition. Yet, when the Tathāgata designates [F.13.b] the bodhisattvas
as skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition, they are not
designated as completely skilled merely on account of this. Viśālamati, I call
bodhisattvas ‘skilled in the ultimate’ as soon as 116 they, by themselves and in
their own experience,117 neither perceive the appropriation nor the
appropriating cognition but [instead perceive] in accordance with the truth;
as soon as they neither perceive the subliminal nor the subliminal cognition;

neither the accumulated nor the mind;118 neither the eye, nor the form, nor
the visual cognition; neither the ear, nor the sound, nor the auditive
cognition; neither the nose, nor the smell, nor the olfactory cognition; neither
the tongue, nor the flavor, nor the gustatory cognition; and neither the body,
nor the tangible object, nor the tactile cognition. Viśālamati, I call
bodhisattvas ‘skilled in the ultimate’ as soon as they, by themselves and in
their own experience, neither perceive thought, nor phenomena, nor mental
cognition but instead perceive in accordance with the truth. Viśālamati, the
Tathāgata designates as skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and
cognition the bodhisattvas who are skilled in the ultimate. Viśālamati, for
this reason, bodhisattvas are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and
cognition. Also, when the Tathāgata designates them as such, it is for this
reason.”
5.7

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“Profound and subtle is the appropriating cognition.
Containing all the seeds, it flows like a stream of water.
I did not teach it to the immature,
Lest they would imagine it to be a self.”119
This was the chapter of Viśālamati—[F.14.a] the fifth chapter.

6.

CHAPTER 6

6.1

Then, the bodhisattva Guṇākara asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One, when
bodhisattvas who are skilled in the defining characteristics of phenomena
are called ‘skilled in the defining characteristics of phenomena,’ what does it
mean? Moreover, when the Tathāgata designates them as such, what does it
refer to?”

6.2

The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Guṇākara, “Guṇākara, for the
benefit and happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, for
the welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, including gods and
humans, you are asking this. Your intention is excellent when questioning
the Tathāgata on this specific point. Therefore, listen, Guṇākara, I will
explain to you in which way bodhisattvas are skilled in the defining
characteristics of phenomena.

6.3

“Guṇākara, the defining characteristics of phenomena are three. What are
these three? They are the imaginary defining characteristic, the otherdependent defining characteristic, and the actual defining characteristic.120

6.4

“Guṇākara, what is the imaginary defining characteristic [of phenomena]?
It is what is nominally and conventionally posited121 as the essence or the
distinctive [characteristic] of phenomena, even just122 in order to
designate 123 [them].124

6.5

“Guṇākara, what is the other-dependent defining characteristic [of
phenomena]? It is the dependent arising of phenomena. It is like this: ‘When
this is, that arises; because this arises, that arises.’ It is also from ‘[in
dependence upon ignorance as a condition,] conditioning mental factors
[arise]’ up to ‘thus, the whole great mass of suffering comes to be.’ [F.14.b]

6.6

“Guṇākara, what is the actual125 defining characteristic [of phenomena]? It
is their true reality, namely, the unsurpassable complete and perfect
awakening that is finally attained by bodhisattvas as they realize this [true
reality] through their diligence and correct application of mind and then
become perfectly familiar with the realization of this [true reality].126

6.7

“Guṇākara, it is like this: you should consider the imaginary defining
characteristic to be just like 127 the falsity of the visual aberrations [perceived]
by someone suffering from the timira visual disorder.
“Guṇākara, it is like this: you should consider the other-dependent
defining characteristic to be just like the phenomenal appearances
manifesting to this very person suffering from the timira disease, such as
[actually nonexistent] hairs, flies, sesame seeds, [or patches of] blue, yellow,
red, or white [in their visual field].
“Guṇākara, it is like this: you should consider the actual defining
characteristic to be just like the original and unerring visual object seen by
the same person when their vision is healthy and free from the visual
aberrations resulting from the timira disease.

6.8

“Guṇākara, it is like this: when a pure crystal is in contact with something
blue, it appears to be a sapphire. Because people perceive it by mistake as a
sapphire, they are deceived by it. When this pure crystal is in contact with
something red, green, or yellow, it appears to be a ruby, an emerald, [F.15.a]
or gold. Because people perceive it by mistake as a ruby, an emerald, or gold,
they are deceived by it.

6.9

“Guṇākara, it is like this: You should consider the mental imprint of
conventions in terms of an imaginary defining characteristic128 upon the
other-dependent defining characteristic to be just like the contact of colors
with a pure crystal. Thus, you should consider the perception of an
imaginary defining characteristic [superimposed] on the other-dependent
defining characteristic to be just like the mistaken perception of a sapphire,
ruby, emerald, or gold [superimposed] on the pure crystal.
Guṇākara, it is like this: You should consider the other-dependent
defining characteristic to be just like this pure crystal itself. Thus, you should
consider the actual defining characteristic as the permanent and immutable
lack of any actuality or essence in the imaginary defining characteristic
[superimposed] on the other-dependent defining characteristic,129 just as
there is permanently and immutably no actuality or essence in the defining
characteristic of a sapphire, ruby, emerald, or gold [superimposed] on a pure
crystal.

6.10

Thus, Guṇākara, bodhisattvas distinctly perceive 130 the imaginary
defining characteristic on the basis of names denoting phenomenal
appearances.131 They distinctly perceive the other-dependent defining
characteristic

on

the

basis

of

the

erroneous

conception132

superimposes] an imaginary defining characteristic
134

dependent defining characteristic.

133

[that

on the other-

They distinctly perceive the actual

defining characteristic on the basis of the nonexistence of any erroneous
conception [that superimposes] an imaginary defining characteristic on the
other-dependent defining characteristic.
6.11

“Guṇākara, when bodhisattvas distinctly perceive the imaginary defining
characteristic [superimposed] on the other-dependent defining characteristic
of phenomena exactly as it is, they distinctly perceive the phenomena devoid
of any defining characteristic exactly as they are. [F.15.b] Guṇākara, when
bodhisattvas distinctly perceive the other-dependent defining characteristic
exactly as it is, they distinctly perceive the phenomena characterized by
affliction exactly as they are. Guṇākara, when bodhisattvas distinctly
perceive the actual defining characteristic exactly as it is, they distinctly
perceive the phenomena characterized by purification exactly as they are.
Guṇākara, when bodhisattvas distinctly perceive the phenomena devoid of a
defining characteristic [superimposed] on the other-dependent defining
characteristic

exactly

as

they

are, they

abandon

the

phenomena

characterized by affliction. Once they have abandoned the phenomena
characterized by affliction, they will obtain the phenomena characterized by
purification. Guṇākara, since bodhisattvas distinctly perceive in this way the
imaginary,

other-dependent,

and

actual

defining

characteristics

of

phenomena exactly as they are, they distinctly perceive the phenomena
devoid of a defining characteristic, those characterized by affliction, and
those characterized by purification exactly as they are.135 Having distinctly
perceived the phenomena devoid of a defining characteristic exactly as they
are, they abandon the phenomena characterized by affliction. Once they
have abandoned the phenomena characterized by affliction, they will obtain
the phenomena characterized by purification. For all these reasons,
bodhisattvas are skilled in the defining characteristics of phenomena.
Moreover, when the Tathāgata designates the bodhisattvas as ‘skilled in the
defining characteristics of phenomena,’ it is for these reasons.”
6.12

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“Once the phenomena devoid of defining characteristics have been
distinctly perceived,
The phenomena characterized by affliction will be abandoned. [F.16.a]
Once the phenomena characterized by affliction have been abandoned,
The phenomena characterized by purification will be obtained.
“Careless beings, overcome by wrongdoing and indulging in laziness,
Do not realize the imperfection of conditioned phenomena.
Falling apart in the midst of fleeting phenomena,
They deserve 136 compassion.”
This was the chapter of Guṇākara —the sixth chapter.

7.

CHAPTER 7

7.1

At that time, the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata asked the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, when I was alone in a secluded place, I had the following
thought: ‘The Blessed One also spoke in many ways of the defining
characteristic specific to the five aggregates, mentioning the defining
characteristic

of
137

comprehension.

their

arising,

disintegration,

abandonment,

and

In the same way, he spoke of the twelve sense domains,

dependent arising, and the four kinds of sustenance. The Blessed One also
spoke in many ways of the defining characteristic of the four noble truths,
mentioning the comprehension of suffering, the abandoning of the cause of
suffering, the actualization of the cessation of suffering, and the practice of
the path. The Blessed One also spoke in many ways of the defining
characteristic specific to the eighteen constituents, mentioning their
varieties, manifoldness, abandonment, and comprehension. The Blessed One
also spoke in many ways of the defining characteristic specific to the four
applications of mindfulness, mentioning their adverse factors, antidotes,
practice, their arising from being non-arisen, their remaining after they arose,
and their maintaining, resuming, or increasing. Similarly, he also spoke in
many ways of the defining characteristic specific to the four correct selfrestraints, the four bases of supernatural powers, the five faculties, the five
forces, and the seven branches of awakening. [F.16.b] The Blessed One also
spoke in many ways of the defining characteristic specific to the eight
branches of the path, mentioning their adverse factors, antidotes, and
practices, their arising from being non-arisen and remaining after they arose,
and their maintaining, resuming, or increasing.’
“When the Blessed One further said, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence,138 unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’ what was the underlying intent of the
Blessed One? I would like to ask the Blessed One about this point: what was

the Blessed One thinking when he said, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally
in the state of nirvāṇa’?”
7.2

The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata, “Paramārthasamudgata,

this

reflection

of

yours

arose

virtuously

and

appropriately. It is excellent indeed. You are asking this for the benefit and
happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the
welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, including gods and humans.
Your intention is excellent when questioning the Tathāgata on this specific
point. Therefore, listen, Paramārthasamudgata. I will explain to you what my
underlying intent was when I declared, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, [F.17.a] primordially in the state of peace, and
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’139
7.3

“Paramārthasamudgata, the essencelessness of all phenomena has three
aspects. Having in mind essencelessness regarding defining characteristics,
essencelessness regarding arising, and essencelessness regarding the
ultimate, I thus taught what is called the essencelessness of all phenomena.

7.4

“Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena
with regard to defining characteristics? It is the imaginary defining
characteristic [of phenomena]. Why? Because as much as this defining
characteristic is nominally and conventionally posited, it is not posited140 on
the basis of an essence or a distinctive [characteristic].141 Therefore, it is
called the essencelessness of all phenomena with regard to defining characteristics.

7.5

“Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena
with regard to arising? It is the other-dependent defining characteristic of
phenomena. Why? Because this is [the defining characteristic] arising on
account of causes other [than itself] and not by itself. Therefore, it is called
essencelessness with regard to arising.

7.6

“Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena
with regard to the ultimate? Phenomena arising in dependence upon causes,
which lack an essence on account of lacking an essence in terms of arising
and also lack an essence on account of lacking an ultimate essence. Why?
Because, Paramārthasamudgata, I showed that the referential object
conducive to purification within phenomena is the ultimate, but the otherdependent defining characteristic is not the referential object conducive to
purification. Therefore, this essencelessness is called essencelessness with regard
to the ultimate.
“Moreover, Paramārthasamudgata, the actual defining characteristic of
phenomena should also be referred to as essencelessness with regard to the
ultimate.

Why?

Because,

Paramārthasamudgata,

the

selflessness

of

phenomena is called the essencelessness of phenomena, which is the [F.17.b]
ultimate, but the ultimate is characterized by142 the essencelessness of all
phenomena. Therefore, it is called essencelessness with regard to the ultimate.143
7.7

“Paramārthasamudgata, it is like this: consider essencelessness with
regard to defining characteristics to be exactly like a [nonexistent] sky
flower; consider essencelessness with regard to arising, as well as
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in one of its aspects, to be
exactly like a magic illusion;144 consider essencelessness with regard to the
ultimate in its other aspect, which consists in the selflessness of phenomena
and pervades everything, to be exactly like space, which consists in the
essencelessness of form and pervades everything.145

7.8

“Paramārthasamudgata, with this threefold essencelessness in mind, I
taught what is called the essencelessness of all phenomena. Paramārthasamudgata, having in mind essencelessness with regard to defining characteristics,
I taught, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing,
primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ Why?
Because, Paramārthasamudgata, what lacks a specific defining characteristic
is unborn. What is unborn is unceasing. What is unborn and unceasing is
primordially in the state of peace. What is primordially in the state of peace is
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa. For what is naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,
there is nothing in the slightest that passes into the state of nirvāṇa.
Therefore, having in mind essencelessness with regard to defining
characteristics, I taught, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of
nirvāṇa.’

7.9

“Paramārthasamudgata, having in mind essencelessness with regard to
the ultimate, [F.18.a] which is characterized by selflessness, I taught, ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the
state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ Why? Because
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate, which is characterized by
selflessness, indeed abides permanently and immutably. As the nature of
phenomena, it is unconditioned and free from all afflictions. What
permanently and immutably abides as the very nature of phenomena, being
unconditioned, is unborn and unceasing due to being unconditioned.
Because it is free from all afflictions, it is primordially in the state of peace
and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.146 Therefore, having in mind
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate, which is characterized by
selflessness, I taught, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of
nirvāṇa.’

7.10

“Paramārthasamudgata,

I

did

not

designate

three

kinds

of

essencelessness because those in the world of beings consider that the
imaginary essence and the other-dependent essence, as well as the actual
essence, are different by nature.147 Rather, I did so because they
superimpose an imaginary essence on the other-dependent essence and the
actual essence and because they designate the other-dependent essence and
the actual essence as the defining characteristics of an imaginary essence.
While they designate them in this way, their minds,148 which are saturated
with

designations,
149

predisposed

become

confined

to

such

designations

and

toward them. On this basis, they wrongly conceive the other-

dependent essence and the actual essence as the defining characteristics of
an imaginary essence. [F.18.b] Wrongly conceiving them in this way, with
their wrong conception of the other-dependent essence as the defining
characteristic of an imaginary essence acting as a cause and condition, they
will give rise in the future to an other-dependent essence.150 As a result of
this, they will be afflicted by the afflictions of defilements, karma, and birth.
Because they will not pass beyond saṃsāra, they will transmigrate and
wander among hell beings, animals, hungry ghosts, gods, demigods, and
humans for a very long time.
7.11

“Among these beings, Paramārthasamudgata, some do not produce roots
of virtue from the very beginning. They do not clear obstructions or bring
their mental continuums to maturity. Their confidence in my teaching is
limited and they have not accomplished the accumulations of merit and
gnosis. I impart to those beings the teaching on essencelessness with regard
to arising. Once they have heard this teaching, they understand that
conditioned phenomena arising in dependence on causes are of an
impermanent, unstable, and unreliable nature. They develop aversion and
repulsion towards conditioned phenomena. Once they have done this, they
turn away from wrongdoing. Not committing any wrongdoing, they
establish themselves in virtue. With this as a cause, they produce the roots of
virtue that were yet to be produced. They clear obstructions that were yet to
be cleared. They bring their mental continuums, which were not yet mature,
to maturity. As a result, their confidence in my teaching becomes vast, and
they will accomplish the accumulations of merit and gnosis.

7.12

“Although such beings have produced in this way roots of virtue up to the
accomplishment of the accumulation of merit and gnosis, they [F.19.a] do not
understand essencelessness with regard to arising just as it is, as the
essencelessness

with

regard

to

defining

characteristics

and

the

essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in its two aspects. For this
reason, they will not be completely repulsed by all conditioned phenomena,
completely free from desire, or completely liberated. They will not be

completely liberated from all the afflictions of defilements, karma, and birth.
It is therefore for them that the Tathāgata imparts the teaching on the
essencelessness

with

regard

to

defining

characteristics

and

the

essencelessness with regard to the ultimate. He does so in order to make
them feel repulsion towards all conditioned phenomena, as well as to free
them from desire, to completely liberate them, and to take them perfectly151
beyond the afflictions of defilements, karma, and birth.
7.13

“Once they have heard this teaching, they do not wrongly conceive the
other-dependent essence as the defining characteristic of an imaginary
essence. As a result, they accept the essencelessness with regard to arising
as the essencelessness with regard to defining characteristics and the
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in its two aspects. They discern
and understand it exactly as it is. It is like this: Their minds,152 which are no
longer saturated with designations, are not confined to these designations
or predisposed toward them. As a result, by attaining the powers of wisdom
in this life and perfectly cutting off the continuity [of the aggregates] into a
future existence, they will put an end to the other-dependent defining
characteristic. On this basis, they will be completely repulsed by all
conditioned phenomena, completely free from desire, and completely
liberated. [F.19.b] They will be completely liberated from all the afflictions of
defilements, karma, and birth.

7.14

“Moreover, Paramārthasamudgata, even those belonging to the lineage of
the hearers’ vehicle attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable happiness, through
this very path and journey,153 as do those belonging to the lineage of the
solitary realizers’ vehicle and the lineage of the tathāgatas. This is why it is
the single path of purification for hearers, solitary realizers, and
bodhisattvas. Since there is only a single purification, there is no other.
Therefore, with this in mind, I taught the Single Vehicle. Yet, it is not the case
that those in the world of beings are not of various types corresponding to
their capacities, be they weak, average, or sharp in accordance with their
nature.

7.15

“Paramārthasamudgata, even if they were to exert themselves as all
buddhas did,154 individuals belonging to the hearers’ lineage with the state
of peace as their sole journey could not reach the heart of awakening and
attain the unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening. Why? Because,
having limited compassion and a great fear of suffering, they belong to a
lineage that is by nature inferior. Thus, having limited compassion, they
avoid striving for beings’ welfare. Being afraid of suffering, they stay clear
from the conditioning process of the mental factors.155 However, I did not
teach that avoiding striving for beings’ welfare and staying clear from the

conditioning process of the mental factors was the unsurpassable, complete
and perfect awakening. Therefore, these individuals are called those who have
the state of peace as their sole journey.
7.16

“I taught that hearers who evolve toward awakening belong to the [F.20.a]
category of bodhisattvas because, liberated from the obscuration of
defilements and inspired by the tathāgatas, they liberate their minds from
the obscuration of cognitive objects. It is [only] because they first liberated
themselves from the obscuration of defilements for their own sake that the
Tathāgata designated them as the lineage of hearers.

7.17

“Thus, Paramārthasamudgata, there are beings with various degrees of
confidence in my Dharma and my Vinaya, which are well proclaimed, well
imparted, pure in their intention, and well communicated. In this teaching,
Paramārthasamudgata, the Tathāgata, having in mind the three kinds of
essencelessness, teaches through a discourse of provisional meaning: ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the
state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’

7.18

“Among such beings, Paramārthasamudgata, some have produced roots
of virtue, purified their obscurations, and brought their mental continuum to
maturity. They have much confidence in my teaching and have
accomplished the accumulations of merit and gnosis. Once they have heard
my teaching, they understand my explanations in accordance with my
underlying intent exactly as it is. Moreover, they recognize that this teaching
is the truth.156 Through their wisdom, they realize its meaning exactly as it is.
By also engaging in the practice of this realization, they will very quickly
attain the ultimate state. They will develop faith in these teachings, and
think, ‘Amazing! The Blessed One is completely and perfectly awakened.
Through him, one becomes perfectly awakened with respect to all
phenomena.’

7.19

“Among such beings, some have not produced roots of virtue, purified
their obscurations, and brought their mental continuums to maturity. Their
confidence in my teaching is limited and [F.20.b] they have not accomplished
the accumulations of merit and gnosis. They are honest and sincere. Unable
to evaluate and refute 157 [others’ views], they do not consider their own as
supreme. Once they have heard my teaching, although they do not
understand my explanations in accordance with my underlying intent
exactly as it is, they still develop confidence and faith in these teachings:
‘The Tathāgata’s discourse is profound and has the appearance of
profundity. [Because] emptiness is the topic of this discourse, it is difficult to
perceive and difficult to understand. Being beyond judgment, it does not
belong to the domain of speculation. It can [only] be known by intelligent
scholars well versed in the subtle.’158 They think, ‘We do not understand the

meaning of this sūtra and these teachings that were taught by the Blessed
One. Profound is the awakening of the Buddha and the nature of
phenomena. Only the Tathāgata understands them. We, however, do not.
The Dharma taught by the tathāgatas arises according to the various
inclinations of beings. Their gnosis 159 and perception are infinite, whereas
ours are merely like the [shallow] hoofprints left by a cow.’ Filled with
devotion for these discourses, they also write them down. Having written
them down, they also keep them in mind, read them, propagate them,
venerate them, expound them, recite them, and chant them aloud. However,
because they do not understand these profound teachings in accordance
with my underlying intent, they are unable to engage themselves in the
various aspects of practice. As a consequence of this, they will further
develop their accumulation of merit and gnosis, and those whose mental
continuums are still immature will bring them to maturity.
7.20

“Other beings have not perfectly completed these stages up to the great
accumulation of merit and gnosis. [F.21.a] They are dishonest and insincere.
Capable of evaluating and refuting [others’ views], they consider their own
as supreme. Once they have heard my teaching, they do not understand my
profound explanations in accordance with my underlying intent exactly as it
is. Although they have confidence in this teaching, they wrongly conceive it
according to its literal meaning: ‘All phenomena are only without an essence,
only unborn, only unceasing, only primordially in the state of peace, and only
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ As a consequence of this, they acquire the
view that all phenomena are inexistent and the view that they are without
defining characteristics. Then, once they have acquired these views, they
negate all phenomena by [negating] all defining characteristics, thereby
negating the imaginary defining characteristic as well as the otherdependent and actual defining characteristics. Why is it said that they
negate all three defining characteristics? Because, Paramārthasamudgata, if
the other-dependent and actual defining characteristics are accepted, then
the imaginary defining characteristic also will be distinctly perceived. Now,
those who consider the other-dependent and actual defining characteristics
as inexistent have already negated the imaginary defining characteristic.
This is why they are called those who negate all three defining characteristics. They
consider my teaching to be the truth while considering some nonsense to be
its meaning. Those who consider my teaching to be the truth while
considering some nonsense to be its meaning cling to my teaching as the
truth while at the same time clinging to some nonsense as its meaning. Since
they have confidence in my teaching, they will progress by developing
virtuous qualities. However, because they wrongly conceive some nonsense

to be the meaning of my teaching, they will stray from wisdom. Straying from
wisdom, [F.21.b] they will stray from the vast and immeasurable virtuous
qualities.
7.21

“Others hear from those beings that my teaching is the truth while some
nonsense is its meaning. Then, delighted by this view, they accept that my
teaching is the truth and some nonsense is its meaning. Thus, they wrongly
conceive my teaching as the truth with some nonsense as its meaning. As a
consequence of this, you should know that they will likewise stray from
virtuous qualities.

7.22

“Others who take no delight in this view are overcome by fear and anxiety
when they hear that all phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of
nirvāṇa. They then say, ‘These are not the words of the Buddha but the
words of Māra!’ Thinking in this way, they reject this discourse, disparage it,
denigrate it, and criticize it. As a consequence of this, they will obtain the
great misfortune as well as the great karmic obscuration [of rejecting the
truth].160 This is precisely why I said, ‘Those who mislead the multitude of
beings into obtaining the great karmic obscuration, who consider all
defining characteristics as inexistent and teach some nonsense as the
meaning of my teaching, are burdened with great karmic obscuration [of
rejecting the truth].

7.23

“Paramārthasamudgata, among such beings, some have not produced
roots of virtue, purified their obscurations, and brought their mental
continuum to maturity. Their confidence in my teaching is limited, and they
have not accomplished the accumulations of merit and gnosis. They are
dishonest and insincere. Although they are unable to evaluate and refute
[others’ views], they consider their own as supreme. When they hear my
teaching, they neither understand my explanations in accordance with my
underlying intent exactly as it is, nor do they develop confidence in this
teaching. They accept that my teaching is not the truth and its meaning is
some nonsense. They say, ‘These are not the words of the Buddha [F.22.a]
but the words of Māra!’ Thinking in this way, they reject this discourse,
disparage it, denigrate it, criticize it, and distort [its meaning]. In many ways,
they apply themselves to discarding, undermining, and subverting this
discourse, considering as enemies those who are devoted to it. From the very
beginning, they are affected by the karmic obscuration [of rejecting the
truth]. As a consequence of this, they also cause [others] to be obscured by
this karmic obscuration. Although it is easy to determine the beginning of
this karmic obscuration, it is difficult to know how many myriad eons it will
last.

“Thus, Paramārthasamudgata, those are the various degrees of confidence
in my Dharma and my Vinaya,161 which are well proclaimed, well imparted,
pure in their intention, and well communicated.”
7.24

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“All phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
Unceasing, primordially in the state of peace,
And naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.
What wise person would say this without an underlying intent?
“I have spoken of essencelessness
With regard to defining characteristics, arising, and the ultimate.
No wise person who understands my underlying intent
Will travel the path leading to corruption.
“There is only one path of purification for all beings,
As there is only one purification, not two.
This is why, even if there are various lineages of beings,
I proclaimed the Single Vehicle.
“In the world of beings, innumerable are
The solitary beings who attain nirvāṇa,
While rare are those who have attained nirvāṇa
And possess the energy and compassion to not turn away from beings.
[F.22.b]
“Subtle, inconceivable, and undifferentiated
Is the uncontaminated domain of those who are liberated.
Nondual and inexpressible, blissful and immutable,
It is the accomplishment of all [intentions], the release from all suffering and
defilements.”

7.25

Then, the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, the speech expounding the underlying intent of the buddhas
is subtle, extremely subtle, profound, extremely profound, difficult to
understand, and extremely difficult to understand. How marvelous, how
wonderful it is!
“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization,162 is nominally and conventionally posited as an essential
characteristic or a distinctive characteristic,163 for example as the aggregate
of form, its arising, its cessation, its abandonment, or the comprehension of
this aggregate. What is posited in this way is the imaginary defining

characteristic. For this reason, Blessed One, you referred to essencelessness
with regard to the defining characteristics of phenomena. The phenomenal
appearance of conditioned phenomena, namely, the basis of the imaginary
defining characteristic, the object of conceptualization, is the otherdependent defining characteristic. For this reason, Blessed One, you referred
to essencelessness with regard to both the arising of phenomena and the
ultimate in one of its aspects.
“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: this very phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is devoid of any actuality or essence as that which has an
imaginary defining characteristic.164 [F.23.a] On account of this, this
essencelessness or selflessness of phenomena, true reality, the referential
object conducive to purification, is the actual defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to the essencelessness of phenomena with
regard to the ultimate in its other aspect.
“One should proceed in exactly the same way with the remaining
aggregates as well as with each of the twelve sense domains, the twelve
factors of conditioned existence, the four kinds of sustenance, and the six
and eighteen constituents.
7.26

“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is nominally and conventionally posited as an essential
characteristic or a distinctive characteristic, for example as the noble truth of
suffering or the comprehension of suffering. For this reason, Blessed One,
you referred to essencelessness with regard to the defining characteristics of
phenomena. The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is the other-dependent defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to essencelessness with regard to both the
arising of phenomena and the ultimate in one of its aspects.
“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: This very phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is devoid of any actuality or essence as that which has an
imaginary defining characteristic.165 [F.23.b] On account of this, this
essencelessness or selflessness of phenomena, true reality, the referential
object conducive to purification, is the actual defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to the essencelessness of phenomena with
regard to the ultimate in its other aspect.

“As with the noble truth of suffering, one should proceed in exactly the
same way with the other truths. As with the truths, so one should proceed in
exactly the same way with each of the applications of mindfulness, the selfrestraints, the bases of supernatural powers, the faculties, the forces, the
branches of awakening, and the branches of the path.
7.27

“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is nominally and conventionally posited as an essential
characteristic or a distinctive characteristic, for example as correct
concentration,166 its adverse factors and antidotes, its practice, its arising
from being non-arisen, its remaining after it arose, and its maintaining,
resuming, increasing, or expanding. For this reason, Blessed One, you
referred to essencelessness with regard to the defining characteristics of
phenomena. The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is the other-dependent defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to essencelessness with regard to both the
arising of phenomena and the ultimate in one of its aspects.
“This is how I [F.24.a] understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: This very phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is devoid of any actuality or essence as that which has an
imaginary defining characteristic. On account of this, this essencelessness or
selflessness of phenomena, true reality, the referential object conducive to
purification, is the actual defining characteristic. For this reason, Blessed
One, you referred to the essencelessness of phenomena with regard to the
ultimate in its other aspect.

7.28

“Blessed One, thus it is said, for example, that dried ginger should be
added to all medicinal powders and elixirs. Likewise, this teaching of
definitive meaning expounded by167 the Blessed One in reference to the
statement, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing,
primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’168
should also be added to all the discourses of provisional meaning.169
“Blessed One, it is like this: for example, the canvas for a painting, whether
blue, yellow, red, or white, is identical for all painted figures and thus
perfectly clarifies their contours. Likewise, this teaching of definitive
meaning expounded by the Blessed One in reference to the statement, ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the

state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’ is identical in all
discourses of provisional meaning and thus perfectly clarifies their
interpretable intent.
“Blessed One, it is like this: for example, adding clarified butter to all sorts
of stews, meat dishes, and porridge is delicious. Likewise, it is delightful to
add to all discourses of provisional meaning this teaching of definitive
meaning expounded by the Blessed One in reference to the statement, ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the
state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ [F.24.b]
“Blessed One, it is like this: for example, space is identical everywhere
and, [being empty and free from all obstruction,] does not hinder any
endeavor. Likewise, this teaching of definitive meaning expounded by the
Blessed One in reference to the statement, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally
in the state of nirvāṇa,’ is identical in all discourses of provisional meaning
and does not hinder any endeavor in the course of the hearers’, solitary
realizers’, or bodhisattvas’ vehicle.”
7.29

Following these words, the Blessed One complimented the bodhisattva
Paramārthasamudgata: “Excellent, Paramārthasamudgata, this is excellent!
You have understood my explanation in accordance with the Tathāgata’s
underlying intent. Your examples of the dried ginger, painting, clarified
butter, and space perfectly illustrated its point. Paramārthasamudgata, so it
is, and not otherwise. Therefore, keep in mind this teaching in this way.”

7.30

Then, the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata spoke again to the Blessed
One: “In the deer park of Ṛṣivadana in Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One first set in
motion the wonderful wheel of Dharma by teaching the four noble truths to
those who were engaged in the hearers’ vehicle. Not a single god or human
in the world had previously ever turned such a wheel of Dharma. However,
this turning of the Dharma wheel by the Blessed One was surpassable and
adapted to the circumstances. Being of provisional meaning,170 it became a
topic of dispute. Then, for those who were engaged in the Great Vehicle,
[F.25.a] you turned the second, even more wonderful, wheel of Dharma in
the form of a teaching on emptiness: ‘All phenomena are without an essence,
unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the
state of nirvāṇa.’ However, this turning of the Dharma wheel by the Blessed
One was surpassable and adapted to the circumstances. Being of provisional
meaning, it became a topic of dispute. Then, for those who were engaged in
all vehicles,171 you turned the third wonderful Dharma wheel of excellent
discernment in reference to the statement, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and by nature

in the state of nirvāṇa.’172 This turning of the Dharma wheel by the Blessed
One was unsurpassable and not limited to the circumstances. Being of
definitive meaning, it did not become a topic of dispute.
7.31

“Blessed One, when sons or daughters of noble family have heard the
teaching of definitive meaning taught by the Blessed One in reference to the
statement, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing,
primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’ they
develop devotion for this teaching and commission its transcription into
writing. Once it has been put into writing, they keep it in mind, read it,
venerate it, propagate it, expound it, chant it aloud, contemplate it, and apply
it in their practice. As they do so, how much merit will they produce?”

7.32

The Blessed One answered, “Paramārthasamudgata, these sons and
daughters of noble family will produce immeasurable and [F.25.b]
incalculable merit. Although it is difficult to illustrate this with examples, I
will briefly explain it to you. Paramārthasamudgata, it is like this: Compared
to the amount of earth, the amount of dirt at the tip of a fingernail does not
come close to a hundredth, a thousandth, a one hundred thousandth of it, or
anything

implying

calculation,

partition,

numeration,

analogy,

or

comparison. Compared to the amount of water contained in the four great
oceans, the amount of water contained in the hoofprint of an ox does not
come close to a hundredth, a thousandth, a one hundred thousandth of it, or
anything

implying

calculation,

partition,

numeration,

analogy,

or

comparison. Likewise, Paramārthasamudgata, compared to the amount of
merit accumulated by developing confidence in my teaching of definitive
meaning up to applying it in one’s practice, the amount of merit accumulated
by developing confidence in my teaching of provisional meaning … up to
applying it in one’s practice does not come close to a hundredth, a
thousandth, a one hundred thousandth of it, or anything implying
calculation, partition, numeration, analogy, or comparison.”
7.33

The bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata inquired, “Blessed One, what is
the name of this teaching as a Dharma discourse that unravels the
Tathāgata’s intent?173 How should I keep it in mind?”174
The Blessed One answered: “Paramārthasamudgata, this is a teaching of
definitive meaning on the ultimate. Therefore, keep it in mind as The Teaching
of Definitive Meaning on the Ultimate.”
As the Blessed One expounded this teaching of definitive meaning on the
ultimate, six hundred thousand beings produced the mind directed at the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening;175 three hundred thousand
hearers purified the Dharma eye from impurities and contaminations; one

hundred and fifty hearers who were without attachment liberated their
minds from all outflows; and seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas attained
the acceptance that phenomena are non-arisen. [F.26.a]
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata—the seventh chapter.

8.

CHAPTER 8

8.1

Then, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked a question to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas practice mental stillness and insight in the
Great Vehicle, what is their support and basis?”
The Blessed One answered, “Maitreya, their support and basis are the
discourses teaching Dharma and the constant aspiration to attain the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening.

8.2

“The Blessed One taught that four things are the referential objects of
mental stillness and insight: the image with conceptualization; the image
without conceptualization; the point where phenomena end; and the
accomplishment of the goal.”
“Blessed One, how many referential objects of mental stillness are there?”
“There is [only] one, namely, the image without conceptualization.”
“How many are the referential objects of insight?”
“There is only one, namely, the image with conceptualization.”
“How many are the referential objects of both combined?”
“There are two, namely, the point where phenomena end and the
accomplishment of the goal.”

8.3

“Blessed One, once bodhisattvas have taken as a support and basis these
four things that are the referential objects of mental stillness and insight,
how do they dedicate themselves to mental stillness? How do they become
skilled in the practice of insight?”
“Maitreya, I have given to the bodhisattvas discourses teaching Dharma in
the following twelve collections of teachings: sūtras, discourses in prose and
verse, prophecies, poetic discourses, aphorisms, discourses for specific
beings, narratives, parables, discourses on previous lives, extensive
discourses,

teachings

on

miracles,

and

instructions. [F.26.b]

Once

bodhisattvas have properly heard these explanations, once they have
memorized them well, recited them, examined them, and understood them
by means of discernment, they remain alone in seclusion and settle

themselves in a state of inner absorption. Then, they direct their attention in
that (1) they direct their attention toward the teachings they have properly
contemplated176 and (2) continuously direct their attention inwardly toward
the mind that is directing attention. As they repeatedly engage themselves in
this way, their bodies and minds become flexible. The occurrence of this
physical and mental flexibility is what is called mental stillness. This is how
bodhisattvas dedicate themselves to mental stillness.
8.4

“Once they have obtained177 this physical and mental flexibility, they
settle in this very state and abandon some aspects of mind [corresponding to
mental stillness].178 Then, they apply themselves to analyzing the image that
is the object of their concentration according to the teachings they have
properly

contemplated. Differentiating,

discerning,

considering,

and

examining in this way the cognitive aspects of the image that is the object of
their concentration, accepting and wishing to do so, and distinguishing,
scrutinizing, and investigating [this discerning mind in the same way] is
what is called [the practice of] insight. This is how bodhisattvas are skilled in
insight.”
8.5

“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas direct their attention inwardly toward
the mind that takes the mind as its referential object but have not yet
attained physical and mental flexibility, what do you call their practice of
directing attention?”
“Maitreya, this is not yet mental stillness. So you should refer to it as a
practice aspiring to mental stillness.”
“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas direct their attention toward the image
that is the object of their concentration according to the teachings they have
properly contemplated, but they have not yet attained physical and mental
flexibility, what do you call their practice of [F.27.a] directing attention?”
“Maitreya, this is not yet insight. So you should refer to it as a practice
aspiring to insight.”

8.6

“Blessed One, should we refer to the path of mental stillness and the path
of insight as being distinct or indistinct from one another?”
“Maitreya, we should refer to them as neither distinct nor indistinct. Why
are they not distinct? Because mental stillness takes mind, which is the
referential object of insight, as its object. Why are they not indistinct?
Because insight takes a conceptual image as its referential object.”

8.7

“Blessed One, what image do bodhisattvas focus on as their object of
concentration? Should we consider it as distinct from mind or not?”179
“Maitreya, we must consider that it is not distinct from mind. Why?
Because this image is merely a representation. Maitreya, I have explained
that cognition is constituted180 by the mere representation that is the
referential object [of this cognition].”181

“Blessed One, if this image that is the object of concentration is not distinct
from the mind, how does this very mind investigate itself?”
“Maitreya, [ultimately] no phenomenon whatsoever investigates any
phenomenon at all. However, the mind that arises as [if it were conscious of
an object] appears as [if it were investigating itself]. Maitreya, it is like this:
based on a form [in front of a mirror], you see that same form on the clear
surface of this mirror and realize that you are seeing a reflection, an image in
which this reflection and the form [it is based on] appear to be distinct
objects. Likewise, the mind arising as [if it were conscious of an object] and
what is called its image, the object of concentration, appear as if they were
distinct objects.”182
8.8

“Blessed One, should we say that mental images naturally present to
beings, such as the appearance of material form and so forth, [F.27.b] are also
not distinct from mind?”183
“Maitreya, we should say that they are not distinct. However, foolish
beings with erroneous ideas do not understand just as it is that [mental]
images are mere representations. As a consequence, their minds are
mistaken.”

8.9

“Blessed One, when do the bodhisattvas practice only insight?”
“Whenever they direct their attention184 toward mental appearances 185
without interruption.”
“When do the bodhisattvas practice only mental stillness?”
“Whenever they direct their attention toward the unimpeded mind
without interruption.”
“When do they combine both insight and mental stillness and unite them
evenly?”
“Whenever they direct their attention toward the one-pointedness of
mind.”
“Blessed One, what is a mental appearance?”
“Maitreya, this is the referential object of insight, the conceptual image
that is the object of concentration.”
“What is the unimpeded mind?”
“Maitreya, it is the referential object of mental stillness, the mind that takes
the image as an object.”
“What is one-pointedness of mind?”
“[One-pointedness of mind is] realizing in regard to the image that is the
object of concentration, ‘This is merely a representation,’ and, on realizing
that, directing one’s attention toward true reality.”186

8.10

“Blessed One, how many kinds of insight are there?”
“Maitreya, there are three: insight arising from phenomenal appearance,
insight arising from inquiry, and insight arising from awakening.”187

“What is insight arising from phenomenal appearance?”
“It is the insight in which attention is directed exclusively toward a
conceptual image, the object of concentration.”
“What is insight arising from inquiry?”
“It is the insight in which attention is directed in order to perfectly
understand whatever phenomena were not yet understood by means of
wisdom.”188 [F.28.a]
“What is insight arising from awakening?”
“It is the insight in which attention is directed on whatever phenomena
one perfectly understood by means of wisdom in order to attain the
happiness of liberation.”
8.11

“How many kinds of mental stillness are there?”
“There are three kinds of mental stillness corresponding to the unimpeded
mind. Maitreya, it is also said to be of eight kinds: the first, second, third, and
fourth meditative absorptions, the domain of the infinity of space, the
domain of infinite cognition, the domain of nothingness, and the domain of
neither conception nor lack of conception. It is also of four kinds:
immeasurable loving-kindness, immeasurable compassion, immeasurable
joy, and immeasurable equanimity.”

8.12

“Blessed One, you have mentioned ‘mental stillness and insight that are
established in Dharma’ and ‘mental stillness and insight that are not
established in Dharma.’ What do these terms mean?”
“Maitreya, the mental stillness and insight that are established in Dharma
are the mental stillness and insight whose object is in agreement with
phenomenal appearance as presented in the teachings that bodhisattvas
have understood and contemplated.
“You should know that the mental stillness and insight that are not
established in Dharma are the mental stillness and insight whose object,
being unrelated to the teachings that bodhisattvas have understood and
contemplated, is based on other instructions or precepts, such as taking as
referential objects putrefying or festering corpses as well as any other similar
objects, the impermanence of all conditioned phenomena, the suffering
[inherent to all conditioned phenomena], the selflessness of all phenomena,
and nirvāṇa as the state of peace.189
“Maitreya, regarding this, I consider those bodhisattvas who follow the
teaching based on the mental stillness and insight established in Dharma to
possess sharp faculties. As for those faithfully following the teaching based
on the mental stillness and insight that are not established in Dharma, I
consider them to possess inferior faculties.” [F.28.b]

8.13

“Blessed One, you also mentioned ‘the mental stillness and insight with a
specific190 teaching as a referential object’ and ‘the mental stillness and
insight with a universal teaching as a referential object.’ What do these terms
mean?”
“Maitreya, suppose that bodhisattvas practice the mental stillness and
insight that take as a referential object an individual teaching, such as a
specific discourse, among all the teachings they have understood and
contemplated. This is called mental stillness and insight with a specific teaching as
a referential object.
Now, suppose that bodhisattvas unify, condense, subsume, or gather
teachings from various discourses into a single one, thinking that all these
teachings converge toward true reality, lean toward true reality, and tend
toward true reality; converge toward awakening, lean toward awakening,
and tend toward awakening; converge toward nirvāṇa, lean toward nirvāṇa,
and tend toward nirvāṇa; and converge toward a shift in one’s basis of
existence,191 lean toward a shift in one’s basis of existence, and tend toward
a shift in one’s basis of existence. Thinking that all these teachings actually
refer to the immeasurable and infinite virtuous truth,192 they direct their
attention [toward their referential object]. This is [called] mental stillness and
insight with a universal teaching as a referential object.”

8.14

“Blessed One, you also mentioned mental stillness and insight ‘with a
fairly universal teaching as a referential object,’ ‘with a highly universal
teaching as a referential object,’ and ‘with an infinitely universal teaching as
a referential object.’ What do these terms mean?”
“Maitreya, suppose the bodhisattvas gather together [the meaning of]
each of the twelve collections of my teaching, from the sūtras up to the
extensive discourses, the teachings on miracles, and the instructions. [F.29.a]
Having done so, they direct their attention toward this referential object.
This should be known as the mental stillness and insight with a fairly universal
teaching as a referential object.
When the bodhisattvas gather together193 all the teachings or discourses
they have understood and contemplated and then direct their attention onto
this referential object, this should be known as the mental stillness and insight
with a highly universal teaching as a referential object.
“When the bodhisattvas gather together the teachings imparted by the
tathāgatas that refer to the infinite truth,194 the infinite words and letters
expressing it, and the ever-increasing infinite wisdom and eloquence of the
tathāgatas and then direct their attention toward this referential object, this
should be known as the mental stillness and insight with an infinitely universal
teaching as a referential object.”

8.15

“Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas obtain mental stillness and insight
with a universal teaching as a referential object?”
“Maitreya, you should know that they obtain them through five causes: (1)
At the time of directing their attention, they destroy all supports of
corruption in every moment. (2) After giving up the variety of conditioned
phenomena, they rejoice in the joy of Dharma. (3) They perfectly know the
immeasurable and unceasing brilliance of Dharma in the ten directions. (4)
They bring together, without conceptualizing them, the phenomenal
appearances that are imbued with the accomplishment of the goal and in
harmony with the element conducive to purification. (5) In order to attain,
perfect, and accomplish the truth body, they seize the most supreme and
auspicious cause.”

8.16

“Blessed One, how should we know at which point the bodhisattvas
cognize and obtain the mental stillness and the insight that have a universal
teaching as a referential object?”
“Maitreya, you should know that they cognize them on the first
bodhisattva stage, Utmost Joy, and obtain them on the third stage,
Illuminating. Maitreya, in spite of this, even beginners among bodhisattvas
should not abstain from training in them and directing their attention toward
their referential object.”

8.17

“Blessed One, in what way do mental stillness and insight become a
concentration associated with mental engagement195 and investigation?
[F.29.b] In what way do they become a concentration not with mental
engagement but with investigation only? In what way do they become a
concentration without either mental engagement or investigation?”
“Maitreya, when mental stillness and insight attend to experiences of the
manifest and coarse 196 phenomenal appearances mentioned in the teachings
the bodhisattvas have understood, investigated, and examined, this is the
concentration associated with mental engagement and investigation.
“When mental stillness and insight do not consist in attending the
experiences corresponding to the manifest and coarse phenomenal
appearances mentioned in their teachings but consist in being merely
mindful of appearances, namely, in attending the experience of subtle
phenomenal appearances,197 this is a concentration not with mental
engagement but with investigation only.
“When mental stillness and insight consist in practicing by directing one’s
attention toward the experience of the effortless Dharma with regard to each
and every phenomenal appearance mentioned in these teachings, this is a
concentration without either mental engagement or investigation.

“Moreover, Maitreya, mental stillness and insight arising from inquiry
consist in a concentration associated with mental engagement and
investigation. The mental stillness and insight arising from awakening is a
concentration not with mental engagement but with investigation only.198
The mental stillness and insight taking a universal teaching as its referential
object consist in a concentration without either mental engagement or
investigation.”
8.18

“Blessed One, what is the cause of mental stillness? What is the cause of
setting the mind? What is the cause of equanimity?”
“Maitreya, when one feels excited or feels one might become excited, one
directs one’s attention toward phenomena that induce sorrow and the
unimpeded mind.199 This is what is called the cause of mental stillness.
“Maitreya, when one feels drowsy or feels one might become drowsy, one
directs one’s attention toward phenomena that induce joy and mental
appearance.200 This is what is called the cause of setting the mind.
“Maitreya, whether one is devoted to mental stillness or insight only,
[F.30.a] or practices them in union, when one applies one’s mind without
being affected by these two secondary defilements,201 [namely agitation and
drowsiness,] one directs one’s attention spontaneously. This is what is called
the cause of equanimity.”

8.19

“Blessed One, the bodhisattvas who practice mental stillness and insight
possess the analytical knowledge of designations as well as the analytical
knowledge of the objects of designation.202 In what way do they possess
these analytical knowledges?”
“Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of designations comprises five points:
names, phrases, letters, their individual apprehension, and their collective
apprehension. What is a name? It is that which superimposes a so-called
essential or distinctive characteristic on the phenomena conducive to
affliction and purification for the sake of communication. What is a phrase? It
is that which is based on a collection of those very names taken as its
support and basis in order to designate objects of affliction and purification.
What are letters? They are phonemes acting as the basis for both names and
phrases. What is the analytical knowledge that apprehends them
individually? It is the analytical knowledge resulting from directing one’s
attention toward a specific referential object. What is the analytical
knowledge that apprehends them collectively? It is the analytical knowledge
resulting from directing one’s attention toward a general referential object.
When all these five points are put together, this should be known as the
analytical knowledge of designations. This is how bodhisattvas possess the
analytical knowledge of designations.

8.20

“Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of the objects of designation
comprises ten points: the diversity of things and the nature of things;203 the
apprehending subject and the apprehended object; the abodes and objects of
enjoyment; wrong view and correct view; and the object conducive to
affliction and the object conducive to purification. [F.30.b]
1. “Maitreya, all204 the various divisions of phenomena conducive to
affliction and purification according to their aspects represent the diversity
of things, namely, the fivefold enumeration of the aggregates, the sixfold
enumeration of the internal sense domains, the sixfold enumeration of the
external sense domains, and so on.
2. “Maitreya, the true reality of all these very phenomena conducive to
affliction and purification is the nature of things itself. It has seven
aspects:205 (i) the true reality of arising in the sense that all conditioned
phenomena are without beginning and end; (ii) the true reality of defining
characteristics in the sense that everything, person or phenomenon, is
without a self; (iii) the true reality of representations in the sense that all
conditioned phenomena are mere representations;206 (iv) the true reality of
existence in the sense of the truth of suffering that I have taught; (v) the true
reality of mistaken action207 in the sense of the truth of the origin of suffering
that I have taught; (vi) the true reality of purification in the sense of the truth
of cessation [of suffering] that I have taught; (vii) the true reality of correct
action in the sense of the truth of the path that I have taught.
“Maitreya, on

account

of the

true

reality

of arising, defining

characteristics, and existence, all beings are similar and equal. Maitreya, on
account of the true reality of defining characteristics and representations, all
phenomena are similar and equal. Maitreya, on account of the true reality of
purification, the awakening of the hearers, the awakening of the solitary
realizers, and the unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening are similar
and equal. Maitreya, on account of the true reality of correct action, similar
and equal too are the wisdoms encompassed by the mental stillness and
insight that take as a referential object a universal teaching that has been
heard, contemplated, and practiced.208 [F.31.a]
3. “Maitreya, the apprehending subject consists in the phenomena of the
five physical sense domains, mind, thought, cognition, and mental states.
4. “Maitreya, the apprehended object consists in the six external sense
domains. In addition, Maitreya, apprehending subjects are also apprehended
objects.
5. “Maitreya, the objects corresponding to abodes are the worlds of beings,
which manifest wherever there are beings: as one, one hundred, one
thousand, or one hundred thousand villages; as one, one hundred, one
thousand, or one hundred thousand continents; as one, one hundred, one

thousand, or one hundred thousand great continents of Jambudvīpa; as one,
one hundred, one thousand, or one hundred thousand times the four great
continents; as one, one hundred, one thousand, or one hundred thousand
universes of a thousand worlds; as one, one hundred, one thousand, or one
hundred thousand bichiliocosms; as one, one hundred, one thousand, one
hundred thousand, ten million, one billion, ten billion, one hundred billion,
or ten trillion trichiliocosms; as one, one hundred, one thousand, one
hundred thousand times an incalculable number of them; or as many as the
number of atoms present in one hundred thousand times an incalculable
number of trichiliocosms.
6. “Maitreya, I have taught that objects of enjoyment are the assets and
belongings owned by beings for the sake of their enjoyment.
7. “Maitreya, a wrong view is a mistaken conception, thought, or view
conceiving the impermanent as permanent, suffering as happiness, impurity
as purity, or selflessness as self with regard to notions such as an
apprehending subject. [F.31.b]
8. “Maitreya, a correct view, being the opposite of a wrong view, is its
antidote.
9. “Maitreya, the object conducive to affliction is of three kinds: the object
conducive to the affliction comprising the defilements of the three worlds, to
the affliction of karma, and to the affliction of arising.
10. “Maitreya, the object conducive to purification consists of all that is in
harmony with awakening on account of being free indeed from the three
sorts of affliction.
“Maitreya, you should know that all objects of designation are included in
these ten points.
8.21

“Moreover, Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of these objects of
designation comprises five items. What are they? They are the topics to be
comprehended,

the

objects

of

designation

to

be

comprehended,

comprehension, the result of comprehension, and the communication of this
result.
1. “Maitreya, the topics to be comprehended consist of anything that is
knowable or perceptible, such as what is referred to as the aggregates, the
internal and external sense domains, and so forth.
2. “Maitreya, the objects of designation to be comprehended consist of [all]
cognitive objects, however diverse they appear and as they really are: the
conventional and the ultimate; shortcomings and qualities; conditions and
time; the defining characteristics of arising, abiding, and disintegrating;
sickness, old age, and death; suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation
of suffering, and the path leading to the cessation of suffering; true reality,
the ultimate limit of existence, and the domain of truth; condensed and

detailed teachings; categorical, analytical, interrogative, and dismissive
answers; and secret instructions and proclamations. You should know that
these are the objects of designation to be comprehended.
3. “Maitreya, comprehension is grasping both [F.32.a] the topics and the
objects of designation to be comprehended, any factor that is in harmony
with awakening, such as the applications of mindfulness, the correct selfrestraints, and so forth.
4. “Maitreya, the result of comprehension consists of disciplining and
completely eliminating desire, anger, and delusion, as well as in actualizing
the results of the path of the recluse together with the virtuous qualities of
the

hearers

and

tathāgatas

I

have

described

as

mundane

and

supramundane, ordinary and extraordinary.
5. “Maitreya, communicating this result consists in revealing what brings
about liberation209 on the basis of210 the very teachings one has actualized,
as well as in propagating these teaching for the sake of others.211
“Maitreya, you should know that all objects are subsumed within these
five points.
8.22

“Maitreya, the bodhisattvas’ analytical knowledge of the objects of
designation includes four topics. What are they? They are mental
appropriation, experience, affliction, and purification. Maitreya, you should
know that all the objects of designation are also included within these four
topics.

8.23

“Maitreya, the bodhisattvas’ analytical knowledge of the objects of
designation is also presented according to three topics. What are they? They
are letters, meanings, and contexts.
1. “Maitreya, you should understand the letters as forming collections of
names.
2. “Maitreya, meanings comprise ten aspects: the defining characteristic of
true reality, the defining characteristic of comprehension, the defining
characteristic of abandonment, the defining characteristic of realization, the
defining characteristic of practice, the defining characteristic consisting of
these very five defining characteristics, the defining characteristic of the
relation between the support and the supported, [F.32.b] the defining
characteristic of the phenomena undermining comprehension and so forth,
the

defining

characteristic

of

the

phenomena

in

harmony

with

comprehension, and the defining characteristic of the benefits and
shortcomings resulting respectively from having comprehension or not.
3. “Maitreya, there are five contexts: the context of the surrounding
universe, the context of beings, the context of Dharma, the context of
discipline, and the context of methods of discipline.

“Maitreya, you should know that all objects of designation are also
included within these three topics.”
8.24

“Blessed One, what differences are made between the comprehension of
the objects of designation that is produced by the wisdom arising from
hearing the Dharma, the comprehension of the objects of designation that is
produced by the wisdom arising from contemplating the Dharma, and the
comprehension of the objects of designation that is produced by the wisdom
arising from practicing mental stillness and insight?”
“Maitreya, through the wisdom arising from hearing the Dharma, the
bodhisattvas rely on the literal meaning of words but not on their underlying
intent, which they do not understand; although they are in harmony with
liberation, their comprehension is [limited to] the objects of designation that
do not liberate them.
“Maitreya, through the wisdom arising from contemplating the Dharma,
the bodhisattvas do not rely exclusively on the literal meaning of words but
also on the underlying intent, which they understand; although they are in
great harmony with liberation, their comprehension is [still limited to] the
objects of designation that do not liberate them.
“Maitreya, through the wisdom arising from practicing mental stillness
and insight, the bodhisattvas, relying on the literal meaning of words or not,
rely on the underlying intent, which they understand by means of an image,
an object of concentration corresponding to a cognitive object; they are in
great harmony with liberation, and their comprehension includes the objects
of designation that liberate them. Maitreya, such is the difference between
them.” [F.33.a]

8.25

“Blessed One, what is the gnosis 212 of the bodhisattvas who practice
mental stillness and insight and who comprehend designations as well as
objects of designation? What is their perception?”
“Maitreya, I have explained their gnosis 213 and perception in many ways,
but I will give you a concise explanation. Gnosis consists in the mental
stillness and insight that take a universal teaching as a referential object.
Perception consists in the mental stillness and insight that take a specific
teaching as a referential object.”

8.26

“Blessed One, as bodhisattvas practice mental stillness and insight, which
kinds of phenomenal appearance do they discard? How do they direct their
attention to achieve this?”
“Maitreya, they discard the phenomenal appearance of designations and
objects of designation by directing their attention on true reality. They
discard names by not taking the essence of names as a referential object and
by not paying attention to the phenomenal appearance that constitutes their
basis. You should know that just as it is with names, so it is also with words,

letters, and all objects of designation. Maitreya, they discard letters,
meanings, and contexts by not taking their essence as a referential object
and by not paying attention to the phenomenal appearance that constitutes
their basis.”214
8.27

“Blessed One, is phenomenal appearance also discarded with regard to
the analytical knowledge of the object of designation corresponding to true
reality?”
“Maitreya, if the analytical knowledge of the object of designation
corresponding to true reality does not have a phenomenal appearance and
does not take a phenomenal appearance as its referential object, then what
would be discarded in that case? Maitreya, the analytical knowledge of the
object of designation corresponding to true reality disposes of all the
phenomenal appearances of designations and objects of designation. But I
did not teach that anything at all could dispose of this analytical
knowledge.”

8.28

“Blessed One, you have explained by way of analogy that it is impossible
to discern one’s own appearance 215 in a container filled with muddy water, a
dirty mirror, or an agitated pond surface, [F.33.b] but that it is possible in a
container filled with clear water, a well-polished mirror, or a quiet pond. You
have explained that, likewise, the mind of those who do not practice cannot
know true reality exactly as it is, whereas the mind of those who do practice
can indeed. In reference to this statement, what is this mental inspection?216
What true reality do you have in mind here, and what is the meaning of this
statement?”
“Maitreya, I spoke those words in reference to the three kinds of mental
inspection: the mental inspection arising from hearing the Dharma, the
mental inspection arising from contemplating the Dharma, and the mental
inspection arising from practicing the Dharma. I taught this having in mind
the true reality of representations.”217

8.29

“Blessed One, how many kinds of phenomenal appearances did you teach
to the bodhisattvas who possess the analytical knowledge of designations
and objects of designation and who engage in eliminating phenomenal
appearances?”
“Maitreya, there are ten kinds of phenomenal appearances, and these
bodhisattvas eliminate them by means of emptiness. What are these ten?
1. “The diverse phenomenal appearances in the way of words and letters
through which designations and objects of designation are analytically
known—these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the
emptiness of all phenomena.218

2. “The phenomenal appearances corresponding to a continuum of
arisings and cessations or abidings and transformations through which the
object designated as the true reality of existence is analytically known—
these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of
defining characteristic and by the emptiness of what is without beginning
and end.
3. “The phenomenal appearances resulting from the belief in a perduring
self or the thought, ‘I am,’ through which the object designated as the
apprehending

subject

is

analytically

known—these

phenomenal

appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of the inner subject
and the emptiness of what is not taken as a referential object.219
4. “The phenomenal appearances resulting from the belief in objects of
enjoyment through which the object designated as the apprehended object
is analytically known—these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by
means of the emptiness of the outer object.220
5. “The phenomenal appearances of pleasure within the inner subject and
of beauty regarding the outer object through which courtesans 221 and
possessions are analytically known as objects of enjoyment—these
phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of the
outer object and the emptiness of essence. [F.34.a]
6. “The innumerable phenomenal appearances through which objects of
designation corresponding to states of existence are analytically known—
these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the great
emptiness.
7. “With formlessness as a support, the phenomenal appearances of the
liberation brought about by inner peace are analytically known—these
phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of
conditioned phenomena.
8. “The phenomenal appearance of the selflessness of persons and
phenomena, the phenomenal appearance of what is merely a representation,
and the phenomenal appearance of the ultimate through which the object of
designation corresponding to the true reality of defining characteristics is
analytically known—these phenomenal appearances are eliminated by
means of the emptiness of the limitless, the emptiness of the substanceless,
the emptiness of essence of the substanceless, and the emptiness of the
ultimate.
9. “The phenomenal appearances of what is unconditioned and
changeless through which the object of designation corresponding to the
true reality leading

to purification222 is

analytically known—these

phenomenal appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of the
unconditioned and the emptiness devoid of rejection.

10. “The phenomenal appearances of emptiness resulting from directing
one’s attention toward this very emptiness as an antidote to phenomenal
appearances are eliminated by means of the emptiness of emptiness.”
8.30

“Blessed One, when bodhisattvas

eliminate these ten kinds

of

phenomenal appearances, which phenomenal appearances do they
eliminate and from which binding phenomenal appearances will they be
free?”
“Maitreya, by eliminating the object of concentration, the phenomenal
appearance corresponding to an image,223 bodhisattvas will be free from
phenomenal appearances consisting in the phenomenal appearances of
affliction, which they will also eliminate.
“Maitreya, you should know that these various kinds of emptiness are the
direct antidotes to these various kinds of phenomenal appearance. But it is
not the case that each of them is not an antidote to all phenomenal
appearances. Maitreya, it is like this: ignorance does not [directly] bring
about all afflictions up to old age and death [with regard to the twelve
factors of conditioned existence]. Yet, because it is indeed the closely or very
closely related condition [for their arising, it does bring them about
indirectly]. This is why it is taught that ignorance directly brings about
conditioning mental factors. You should consider the present topic in the
same way. [F.34.b]
8.31

“Blessed One, what is it that bodhisattvas realize in the context of the
Great Vehicle? What is then inherent to the defining characteristic of
emptiness that causes bodhisattvas to not deviate from it because of pride?”
Then, the Blessed One said, “Excellent, Maitreya. You question the
Tathāgata on this point so that bodhisattvas will not deviate from emptiness.
This is excellent indeed. Why? Because, Maitreya, bodhisattvas who deviate
from emptiness will also deviate from the entire Great Vehicle. Therefore,
listen well, Maitreya, and I will explain to you what is inherent to the
defining characteristic of emptiness.
“Maitreya, emptiness as taught in the Great Vehicle means that the otherdependent and actual defining characteristics are completely devoid of the
imaginary defining characteristic of affliction and purification and that
bodhisattvas do not take this imaginary defining characteristic as a
referential object.”224

8.32

“Blessed One, how many types of concentration are included within
mental stillness and insight?”
“Maitreya, you should know that they include all the types of
concentration of the hearers, bodhisattvas, and tathāgatas that I have
taught.”
“Blessed One, from which causes do mental stillness and insight arise?”

“Maitreya, they arise from a pure discipline and a pure view resulting from
hearing and contemplating [the Dharma] as their causes.”
“Blessed One, please explain what their results are.”
“Maitreya, a pure mind and a pure wisdom are their results. You should
know that all mundane and supramundane virtuous qualities of the hearers,
the bodhisattvas, and the tathāgatas are also their results.” [F.35.a]
“Blessed One, what is the activity of mental stillness and insight?”
“Maitreya, they liberate one from the two kinds of bonds: the bonds of
phenomenal appearance and the bonds of corruption.”
8.33

“Blessed One, among the five obstacles mentioned by the Blessed One,
which are obstacles to mental stillness, which are obstacles to insight, and
which are obstacles to both?”
“Maitreya, caring 225 about the body and objects of enjoyment is an
obstacle to mental stillness. Not obtaining instructions from noble beings as
desired is an obstacle to insight. Living in a state of confusion and being
content with bare necessities are obstacles to both.226 On account of the first
of these, one will not exert oneself. On account of the second, one will not
exert oneself through to the completion of practice.”
“Blessed One, among the five obstructions mentioned by the Blessed One,
which are obstructions to mental stillness, which are obstructions to insight,
and which are obstructions to both?”
“Maitreya, agitation and remorse are obstructions to mental stillness.
Laziness, lethargy, and doubts are obstructions to insight. Craving for
desired objects and malicious thoughts are obstructions to both.”
“Blessed One, when is the path of mental stillness purified?”
“At the time when agitation and remorse have been conquered.”
“Blessed One, when is the path of insight purified?”
“At the

time

when

laziness, lethargy, and doubts

have

been

conquered.”227
8.34

“Blessed One, how many kinds of mental distractions will bodhisattvas
engaged in mental stillness and insight experience?”
“Maitreya, they will experience five kinds of mental distractions: the
mental distraction with regard to the way one directs one’s attention, the
mental distraction with regard to outer objects, the mental distraction with
regard to the inner subject, the mental distraction produced by phenomenal
appearances, [F.35.b] and the mental distraction resulting from corruption.
1. “Maitreya, if bodhisattvas forsake the way attention is directed in the
Great Vehicle 228 and fall into the way hearers and solitary realizers direct
their attention, then this is mental distraction regarding the way one directs
one’s attention.

2. “If bodhisattvas let their minds wander among the five external objects
of desire, entertainments, phenomenal appearances, conceptualizations,
defilements, secondary defilements, and external referential objects, then
this is mental distraction with regard to outer objects.
3. “If bodhisattvas sink into laziness and lethargy, experience the taste of
absorption, or become stained by any secondary defilement related to
absorption, then this is mental distraction with regard to the inner subject.
4. “If bodhisattvas direct their attention toward the phenomenal
appearance that is the inner subject’s object of concentration by relying upon
the phenomenal appearances of outer objects, then this is mental distraction
produced by phenomenal appearances.
5. “If bodhisattvas become conceited by identifying themselves with the
body afflicted by corruption with regard to sensations arising in the course
of directing the inner subject’s attention, this is mental distraction ensuing
from corruption.”
8.35

“Blessed One, for which obstacles do mental stillness and insight serve as
antidotes from the first stage of the bodhisattva path up to the stage of a
tathāgata?”
1. “Maitreya, on the first stage, mental stillness and insight are antidotes to
the defilement of bad destinies as well as to the affliction of karma and birth.
2. “On the second stage, they are antidotes to the arising of confusion
resulting from subtle transgressions.
3. “On the third stage, they are antidotes to attachment for desirous
objects.
4. “On the fourth stage, they are antidotes to craving for absorption and
Dharma.
5. “On the fifth stage, they are antidotes to the exclusive rejection of
saṃsāra and exclusive inclination toward nirvāṇa.
6. ‘On the sixth stage, they are antidotes to the abundant arising of
phenomenal appearances.
7. “On the seventh stage, they are antidotes to the subtle arising of
phenomenal appearances.
8. “On the eighth, they are antidotes to exerting oneself toward what is
without phenomenal appearance as well as to not having mastery over
phenomenal appearances.
9. On the ninth, they are antidotes to not having mastery in teaching the
Dharma in every aspect. [F.36.a]
10. “On the tenth, they are antidotes to not having obtained the perfect
analytical knowledge of the truth body.

11. “Maitreya, on the stage of a tathāgata, mental stillness and insight are
antidotes to the extremely subtle defiling obstructions and the even more
subtle cognitive obstructions.229 By fully eliminating these obstructions, one
abides within the truth body that has been completely purified. As a
consequence, one obtains the realization of the object corresponding to the
accomplishment of the goal—the gnosis and vision that are utterly free from
attachment and hindrance.”230
8.36

“Blessed One, in what way do bodhisattvas obtain mental stillness and
insight, so that they will attain the unsurpassable complete and perfect
awakening?”231
“Maitreya, once bodhisattvas have obtained mental stillness and insight,
they consider the seven aspects of true reality.232 With their minds
concentrated on the doctrine that has been heard and contemplated, they
direct their attention inwardly toward the true reality that has been well233
understood, contemplated, and focused upon. As they direct their attention
in this way on true reality, their minds then remain in complete
equanimity234 toward each and every subtle phenomenal appearance that
manifests, not to mention coarse ones.
“Maitreya, these subtle phenomenal appearances include the phenomenal
appearances appropriated by mind; the phenomenal appearances of
experiences, representations, affliction, and purification; the internal or
external phenomenal appearances and those that are both internal and
external; the phenomenal appearances related to the notion that one must
act for the benefit of all beings; the phenomenal appearances of knowledge
and suchness; the phenomenal appearances of the four noble truths of
suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path;235
the phenomenal appearances of the conditioned, the unconditioned, the
permanent, the impermanent, and the nature inherent to what is subject to
suffering and change [F.36.b] or what is not subject to change; the
phenomenal

appearance

distinct

or

indistinct

from

the

defining

characteristic specific to the conditioned; the phenomenal appearance of
everything as a result of having the notion of ‘everything’ in reference to
anything; and the phenomenal appearance of the selflessness of the person
and of phenomena. The bodhisattva’s mind remains in complete equanimity
toward all these phenomenal appearances as they manifest.
“Continually practicing in this way, they will in due time purify their
minds from obstacles, obstructions, and distractions. In the course of this
practice, the seven aspects of the cognition that is personal and intuitive, the
gnosis 236 that is the awakening 237 to the seven aspects of true reality, will
arise. Such is the bodhisattvas’ path of seeing. By obtaining it, bodhisattvas
have entered the faultless state of truth,238 are born into the lineage of

tathāgatas, and, upon obtaining the first stage, enjoy all the advantages of
this stage. Because they have already obtained mental stillness and insight,
they have

attained their two referential objects: the

image

with

conceptualization and the image without conceptualization. Thus, having
obtained the path of seeing, they attain the point where phenomena end.239
“In the higher stages, they enter the path of practice and direct their
attention toward their threefold referential object.240 It is like this: in the way
one uses a smaller wedge to pull out a larger one and thus drives out a
wedge by means of a wedge, they eliminate all phenomenal appearances
related to affliction by eliminating internal phenomenal appearances. When
they eliminate them, they also eliminate corruption. By getting rid of
phenomenal appearance and corruption, they gradually purify their minds
in the higher stages in the way gold is refined. They will attain the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening and also obtain the
realization of the object corresponding to the accomplishment of the goal.241
Thus, Maitreya, [F.37.a] once bodhisattvas have achieved mental stillness
and insight in this way, they will attain the unsurpassable, complete and
perfect awakening.”
8.37

“How do bodhisattvas practice so that they accomplish the great powers
of a bodhisattva?”
“Maitreya, the bodhisattvas who are skillful with regard to these six topics
accomplish the great powers of a bodhisattva: (1) the arising of the mind, (2)
the underlying condition of the mind, (3) the emergence from the mind, (4)
the increase of the mind, (5) the decrease of the mind, (6) and skillful means.
1. “How are they skillful with regard to the arising of the mind? They are
skillful with regard to the arising of the mind as it is if they know the sixteen
ways in which mind arises:242 (i) the representation that is a support and
receptacle, for example, the appropriating cognition;243 (ii) the representation
that is a variegated image of a referential object, for example, the mental
cognition of conceptualizations that simultaneously apprehends forms and
so on, or that simultaneously apprehends outer and inner objects, or that in a
single instant simultaneously settles in several states of concentration,
perceives numerous buddha fields, or sees many tathāgatas —being nothing
but the mental cognition of conceptualizations; (iii) the representation taking
limited phenomenal appearances as its object, for example, the mind related
to the [realm of] desire; (iv) the representation taking vast phenomenal
appearances as its object, for example, the mind related to the [realm of]
form; (v) the representation taking immeasurable phenomenal appearances
as its object, for example, the mind related to the domain of limitless space
and limitless cognition; (vi) the representation taking subtle phenomenal
appearances as its object, for example, the mind related to the domain of

nothingness;

(vii)

the

representation

taking

ultimate

phenomenal

appearances as its object, for example, the mind related to the domain of
neither conception nor lack of conception; (viii) the representation that does
not have phenomenal appearance [as its object], for example, the
supramundane mind and the mind having cessation as its object; [F.37.b] (ix)
the representation involving suffering, for example, the mind of hell beings;
(x) the representation involving mixed sensations, for example, the mind
experienced in the [realm of] desire; (xi) the representation involving joy, for
example, the mind belonging to the first and second meditative absorptions;
(xii) the representation involving bliss, for example, the mind belonging to
the third meditative absorption; (xiii) the representation involving neither
suffering nor bliss, for example, the mind belonging to the fourth meditative
absorption up to the domain of neither conception nor lack of conception;
(xiv) the representation involving defilements, for example, the mind
associated

with

defilements

and

secondary

defilements;

(xv)

the

representation involving virtue, for example, the mind associated with faith
and so on; and (xvi) the neutral representation, for example, the mind that is
not associated with either defilement or virtue.
2. “How are they skillful with regard to the underlying condition of the
mind? They are skillful when they cognize the true reality of representations
as it truly is.244
3. “How are they skillful with regard to the emergence from the mind?
They are skillful when they cognize as they truly are the two bonds, namely,
the bonds of phenomenal appearance and corruption.
4. “How are they skillful with regard to the increase of the mind? They are
skillful when they cognize as such the arising and increase of the mind at the
moment when the mind that is the antidote to phenomenal appearance and
corruption arises and increases.
5. “How are they skillful with regard to the decrease of the mind? They are
skillful when they cognize as such the decrease and decline of the mind at
the moment when the mind afflicted by the adverse factors of phenomenal
appearance and corruption decreases and declines.
6. “How are they skilled in terms of means? They are skillful when they
practice the eight liberations, the eight domains of mastery, and the ten
domains of totality.
“Maitreya, in this way bodhisattvas have accomplished, do accomplish,
and will accomplish the great powers of a bodhisattva. [F.38.a]”
8.38

“The Blessed One said that all sensations have come to complete cessation
in the domain of the nirvāṇa with no aggregates remaining. What are then
those sensations?”245

“Maitreya, in brief, two kinds of sensations cease: (1) the sensations 246
arising from corruption incumbent on being alive and (2) the sensations
arising from their resulting objects.
1. “Among those, the sensations arising from corruption related to one’s
existence are of four kinds: (i) sensations arising from physical corruption,
(ii) sensations arising from nonphysical corruption, (iii) sensations arising
from corruption currently brought to fruition, and (iv) sensations arising
from corruption not yet brought to fruition.
“Sensations arising from corruption brought to fruition refer to present
sensations, whereas sensations arising from sensations not yet brought to
fruition refer to sensations that are the causes for future sensations.
2. “The sensations of their resulting objects are also of four kinds: (i)
sensations related to places, (ii) sensations related to necessities, (iii)
sensations related to enjoyments, and (iv) sensations related to relations.
“Moreover, there are sensations in the domain of the nirvāṇa with
aggregates remaining. Although these include sensations not yet brought to
fruition,247 their opposites, the experience of sensations arising from present
sensations, have not completely ceased. They are experienced as a mixture of
pleasant and unpleasant sensations. Both kinds of sensation already brought
to fruition have completely ceased. Only the category of sensations arising
from present sensations are experienced. In the domain of the nirvāṇa with
no aggregates remaining, even this will cease when one passes into
parinirvāṇa. This is why I said that all sensations have come to a complete
cessation in the domain of the nirvāṇa with no aggregates remaining.”
8.39

Thereupon, the Blessed One spoke these words to the bodhisattva
Maitreya: “Maitreya, you questioned the Tathāgata with determination and
skill regarding the perfect and pure path of yoga. This is excellent. I taught
that this path of yoga is perfect and pure, and exactly248 so I have [F.38.b]
taught and will teach all the perfect buddhas of the past and the future. The
sons and daughters of noble family should devote themselves to this path
with great effort.”249

8.40

Then, at that moment,250 the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“This presentation of the teachings by means of designations
Is thoughtful and of great significance for [the practice of this] yoga.251
Those who, by relying on this Dharma,
Correctly devote themselves to this yoga will attain awakening.252
“Those who, seeking liberation, study the entire Dharma
By looking for faults and disputing it
Are, Maitreya, as far from this yoga
As is the sky from the earth.253

“Wise 254 and skilled in the real meaning 255 of benefiting beings
Is the one who does not strive to benefit beings thinking they will reward
him.256
The one expecting a reward will indeed257 not obtain
The joy that is both258 supreme and free from covetousness.259
“Those who grant Dharma instructions [to obtain] desirous objects
Have renounced desirous objects and yet260 still accept them.
Although these fools have obtained the priceless and faultless 261 jewel of
Dharma,
They wander like beggars.262
“Therefore, with great effort
Strive to abandon disputation, distractions, and mental elaborations.
In order to liberate the world of beings including the gods,
Devote yourself to this yoga.”
8.41

Then, the bodhisattva Maitreya asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One, what
is the name of the teaching imparted in this Dharma discourse that unravels
the Tathāgata’s intent? How should I keep it in mind?”263
The Blessed One answered, “Maitreya, this is a teaching of definitive
meaning on yoga. Keep it in mind as The Teaching of Definitive Meaning on
Yoga.” As the Blessed One expounded this teaching, six hundred thousand
beings produced the mind directed at the unsurpassable, complete and
perfect awakening, three hundred thousand hearers [F.39.a] purified the
Dharma eye from impurities and contaminations; one hundred and fifty
hearers who were without attachment liberated their minds from all
outflows; and seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas attained the state wherein
their attention was directed toward the great yoga.264
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Maitreya—the eighth chapter.

9.

CHAPTER 9

9.1

Then the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara addressed the Blessed One, “Blessed
One, the ten stages of the bodhisattva are called (1) Utmost Joy, (2) Stainless,
(3) Illuminating, (4) Radiant, (5) Hard to Conquer, (6) Manifest, (7) Far
Reaching, (8) Immovable, (9) Excellent Intelligence, and (10) Cloud of
Dharma. When taken together with the eleventh, [called] Buddha Stage, in
how many kinds of purification and subdivisions are they included?”

9.2

The Blessed One answered, “Avalokiteśvara, you should know that they
are included in four kinds of purification and eleven subdivisions.
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the first stage is included in the
purification of intention; the second, in the purification of superior discipline;
and the third, in the purification of superior mind; while stages four to
eleven are included in the purification of superior wisdom, which gradually
leads to perfection from stage to stage. These stages are thus included in
four kinds of purification.

9.3

“What are the eleven levels —the subdivisions including the ten stages of
the bodhisattva and the Buddha Stage?
1. “On the first level consisting of actions based on superior265 devotion,
bodhisattvas cultivate superior devotion and patience 266 by engaging in the
ten practices related to Dharma.267 Once they have passed beyond this stage,
they will enter the faultless state of truth of the bodhisattvas.268
2. “Although the first level is accomplished by these practices, [F.39.b] the
second level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to act while
being aware of confusion resulting from subtle transgressions. By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.
3. “Although the second level is accomplished by this practice, the third
level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to settle into a perfect
mundane concentration and recollect what they have heard. By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.

4. “However, the fourth level is not thereby accomplished, because the
bodhisattvas, who frequently engage in practicing the awakening factors 269
in the way they obtained them, are still unable to settle their minds due to
attachment to states of absorption and the teaching.270 By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.
5. “Although the fourth level is accomplished through this practice, the
fifth level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to fully examine
the truths or settle in superior equanimity regarding saṃsāra and nirvāṇa,
which they exclusively reject or focus upon, respectively. They are still
unable to practice the awakening factors in conjunction with skillful means.
By striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.
6. “Although the fifth level is accomplished by this practice, the sixth level
is not, because, even once they have recognized the activities of conditioned
states for what they are, the bodhisattvas are still unable to maintain for long
an aversion toward them. They are also still unable to remain for long
directing their attention toward what lacks phenomenal appearances. By
striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.
7. “Although the sixth level is accomplished by this practice, the seventh
level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to remain without
hindrance and interruption while directing their attention toward what lacks
phenomenal appearance. By striving to accomplish this level, they will
succeed. [F.40.a]
8. “Although the seventh level is accomplished by this practice, the eighth
level is not, because the bodhisattvas are still unable to rest in equanimity
while striving to abide in what lacks phenomenal appearance. They are also
still unable to attain mastery over phenomenal appearance. By striving to
accomplish this level, they will succeed.
9. “Although the eighth level is accomplished by this practice, the ninth
level is not because the bodhisattvas are still unable to masterfully teach the
Dharma in all its aspects by using synonyms, definitions, explanations, and
categories. By striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.
10. “Although the ninth level is accomplished by this practice, the tenth
level is not because the bodhisattvas are still unable to obtain the analytical
knowledge of the perfect truth body. By striving to accomplish this level,
they will succeed.
11. “Although the tenth level is accomplished by this practice, the eleventh
level is not because the bodhisattvas are still unable to obtain the gnosis and
vision that are utterly free from attachment and hindrance regarding all
cognitive objects.271 By striving to accomplish this level, they will succeed.

“Since this level is accomplished by this practice, all levels are
accomplished. Avalokiteśvara, you should know that all the stages are
included in these eleven levels.”
9.4

“Blessed One, why is the first stage called Utmost Joy? Why are the other
stages up to the Buddha Stage called what they are?”
1. “The first stage is called Utmost Joy because there is a supreme and
immense joy in attaining the immaculate and sublime purpose, the
supramundane mind.
2. The second stage is called Stainless because it is free from all stains
consisting in [even] subtle transgressions or faulty discipline.272
3. The third stage is called Illuminating because it is the very state of
concentration and recollection imbued with the immeasurable light of
gnosis.273 [F.40.b]
4. The fourth stage is called Radiant because the fire of gnosis produced
by the practice of the awakening factors is set ablaze 274 in order to burn the
fuel of afflictions.
5. The fifth stage is called Hard to Conquer because it is difficult indeed to
master the practice of these very awakening factors in conjunction with
skillful means.275
6. The sixth stage is called Manifest because the activity of conditioning
mental factors becomes manifest, as does the bodhisattvas’ attention that is
repeatedly directed toward what lacks phenomenal appearance.
7. The seventh stage is called Far Reaching because once the bodhisattvas
engage for a long time without hindrance and interruption while directing
their attention toward what lacks phenomenal appearance, this stage is
connected with the subsequent stages of purification.
8. The eighth stage is called Immovable because what lacks phenomenal
appearance is spontaneously accomplished and the bodhisattvas are
unshaken by the manifestation of defilements resulting from phenomenal
appearance.
9. The ninth stage is called Excellent Intelligence because the bodhisattvas
obtain a vast intelligence that flawlessly masters all aspects related to
teaching the Dharma.
10. The tenth stage is called Cloud of Dharma because the body afflicted by
corruption, which is as empty as the sky, is pervaded and covered by the
accumulation of Dharma276 that is like a [great] cloud.277
11. The eleventh stage is called Buddha Stage because once one has
abandoned the most subtle defiling and cognitive obstructions, one
completely and perfectly awakens and knows all aspects to be known,278
without attachment and hindrance.”

9.5

“Blessed One, how many kinds of delusion and adverse factors of
corruption are there on these stages?”
“Avalokiteśvara, there are twenty-two kinds of delusion and eleven
adverse factors of corruption:
1. “On the first stage, there is the delusion of wrongly conceiving the
person and phenomena, the delusion of bad destinies, and the adverse factor
of the corruption resulting from these.
2. “On the second stage, there is the delusion of confusion resulting from
subtle transgressions, [F.41.a] the delusion related to the various aspects of
the maturation of karma, and the adverse factor of the corruption resulting
from these two.
3. “On the third stage, there is the delusion of desire, the delusion of
perfectly remembering what was heard, and the adverse factor of the
corruption resulting from these.
4. “On the fourth stage, there is the delusion of attachment to the states of
absorption, the delusion of attachment to Dharma, and the adverse factor of
the corruption resulting from these.
5. “On the fifth stage, there is the delusion of attending to saṃsāra as
exclusively negative or positive, the delusion of attending to nirvāṇa as
exclusively negative or positive, and the adverse factor of the corruption
resulting from these.
6. “On the sixth stage, there is the delusion of making manifest the activity
of conditioning mental factors, the delusion of the many manifesting
phenomenal appearances, and the adverse factor of corruption resulting
from these.279
7. “On the seventh stage, there is the delusion of the manifestation of
subtle phenomenal appearances, the delusion toward skillful means since
one’s attention is exclusively directed toward what lacks phenomenal
appearance, and the adverse factor of the corruption resulting from these.
8. “On the eighth stage, there is the delusion of exerting oneself toward
what lacks phenomenal appearance, the delusion of not having mastery over
phenomenal appearances, and the adverse factor of the corruption resulting
from these.
9. “On the ninth stage, there is the delusion of having mastery in the
boundless teaching and expression of Dharma, the delusion of having
mastery in continuously keeping it in mind in terms of wisdom and
eloquence,280 the delusion of having command of eloquent speech, and the
adverse factor consisting in the corruption resulting from these two types of
delusion.

10. “On the tenth stage, there is the delusion with regard to the sublime
superior knowledge, the delusion of engaging in what is secret and subtle,
and the adverse factor consisting of the corruption resulting from these two.
11. “On the Buddha Stage, there is the delusion of the extremely subtle
attachment to cognitive objects, the delusion of the extremely subtle
hindrance related to defilements, and the adverse factor consisting of the
corruption resulting from these two. [F.41.b]
“Avalokiteśvara, this is a presentation of the stages according to twentytwo kinds of delusion and eleven types of corruption. The unsurpassable,
complete and perfect awakening does not have any of them.”
“In which case,281 Blessed One, the unsurpassable, complete and perfect
awakening, the most sublime blessing and result, is truly wondrous! Once
bodhisattvas have torn the great net of delusion in this fashion and gone
beyond the vast jungle of corruption, they will awaken to the complete and
perfect enlightenment.”282
9.6

“Blessed One, through how many kinds of purifications are these stages
presented?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are presented through eight purifications: (1) the
purification of intention, (2) the purification of the mind, (3) the purification
of compassion, (4) the purification of the perfections, (5) the purification of
the vision of buddhas and of their veneration, (6) the purification of bringing
beings to maturity, (7) the purification of birth, and (8) the purification of
power.
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the purifications on the first stage,
from the purification of superior intention up to the purification of power, as
well as the purifications on the higher stages including the Buddha Stage,
from the purification of superior intention up to the purification of power,
become more and more intense.283 Thus, if one excepts the purification of
birth on the Buddha Stage, the qualities on the first stage seem similar to
those of the higher stages. However, you should know that the qualities of
each higher stage are superior to those on the former stage. You should also
understand that the qualities on the ten stages of a bodhisattva can be
surpassed, whereas the qualities on the Buddha Stage are unsurpassable.”

9.7

“Blessed One, why did you declare that, among all kinds of birth, the birth
of a bodhisattva is supreme?” [F.42.a]
“Avalokiteśvara, it is supreme for four reasons: (1) it accomplishes the
great purification of one’s roots of virtue, (2) it is appropriated as a result of
mental inspection, (3) it is imbued with the compassion that protects all
beings, and (4) it is not itself afflicted, but it repels the afflictions of others.”

9.8

“Blessed One, why did you declare that bodhisattvas practice with a vast
aspiration, are sublime, have a sublime aspiration, and possess the force of
aspiration?”
“Avalokiteśvara, [I declared this] for four reasons: (1) bodhisattvas are
skilled with respect to the blissful state of nirvāṇa, (2) they are able to attain
it swiftly, (3) they have both given up this swift attainment and this blissful
state, and (4) without wavering or being compelled,284 they mentally
produce the aspiration to go for a long time through many kinds of suffering
for the sake of beings. Therefore, I said that bodhisattvas possess a vast
aspiration, a sublime aspiration, and the force of aspiration.”

9.9

“Blessed One, how many foundations of training do the bodhisattvas
have?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they have six: generosity, discipline, patience, diligence,
meditative absorption, and wisdom.”
“Blessed One, among those six, how many constitute the training in
superior discipline, how many constitute the training in superior mind, and
how many constitute the training in superior wisdom?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the first three constitute the
training in superior discipline, meditative absorption constitutes the training
in superior mind, wisdom constitutes the training in superior wisdom, and
diligence is present in each of these trainings.” [F.42.b]
“Blessed One, how many of these foundations of training constitute the
accumulation of merit? How many constitute the accumulation of gnosis?”
“Avalokiteśvara, the training in superior discipline constitutes the
accumulation of merit. The training in superior wisdom constitutes the
accumulation of gnosis. Diligence and meditative absorption are present in
both.”
“Blessed One, how do bodhisattvas train in these six foundations of
training?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they train in these six foundations of training according
to five points: (1) by having devotion from the beginning for the teaching of
the pure Dharma, for the teaching of the six perfections, and for the
collection of teachings on the bodhisattva [path]; (2) by accomplishing next
the wisdom arising from hearing, contemplating, and practicing [the truth]
through the ten activities related to Dharma; (3) by preserving the
awakening mind; (4) by relying upon a virtuous friend; and (5) by
continuously practicing virtue.”
“Blessed One, why are the foundations of training known in terms of a
sixfold classification?”

“Avalokiteśvara, there are two reasons: (1) they benefit beings and (2) they
are antidotes to defilements. You should know that, among them, three
benefit beings while three are antidotes to defilements.
1. “Through their generosity, bodhisattvas benefit beings by providing
them with what is necessary to life; through their discipline, they benefit
beings by not impoverishing them, harming them, or ridiculing them; and
through their patience, they benefit beings by enduring impoverishment,
harm, and ridicule. Thus, they benefit beings through these three
foundations of training.
2. “Through their diligence they apply themselves to the virtue that
completely overcomes defilements and eliminates them, since defilements
are unable to deflect them from this practice; through their meditative
absorption [F.43.a] they destroy defilements; and through their wisdom they
put an end to their latent dispositions. Thus, these three foundations of
training are antidotes to defilements.”
9.10

“Blessed One, why are the other perfections known in terms of a fourfold
classification?”
“Avalokiteśvara, it is because they assist these six perfections:
1. “With the first three perfections, bodhisattvas benefit beings. Then, they
establish beings in virtue through the skillful means consisting of the four
methods of conversion. Therefore, I taught that the perfection of skillful
means assists the first three perfections.
2. “Avalokiteśvara, suppose the bodhisattvas are unable to practice at all
times in this life as a result of their many defilements. Suppose they are
unable to focus their minds within due to the weakness of their superior
intention as a result of their limited experience 285 and aspiration. Suppose
they are unable to accomplish the supramundane wisdom because they did
not practice the meditative absorption based on the referential objects
corresponding to the teachings on the bodhisattva path they have heard.
However, since they have accumulated merit, even to a limited extent, they
produce with their minds the aspiration that their defilements will decrease
in the future. This is the perfection of aspiration. Because defilements
decrease and bodhisattvas are able to exert their diligence through this
perfection, the perfection of aspiration therefore assists the perfection of
diligence.
3. “Then, relying on a noble being and on hearing the Dharma, they attain
the state in which they direct their attention on discipline. Once they have
turned away from having a superior intention whose power is limited, they
obtain the power of intention of the heavenly realms.286 This is the perfection

of power. Because bodhisattvas are able to focus on their minds within
through this perfection, the perfection of power therefore assists the
perfection of meditative absorption. [F.43.b]
4. “The bodhisattvas settle in meditative absorption as they practice the
referential objects corresponding to the teachings on the bodhisattva path
they have heard. This is the perfection of wisdom. Because bodhisattvas are
able to accomplish supramundane wisdom through this perfection, the
perfection of gnosis therefore assists the perfection of wisdom.”
9.11

“Blessed One, why should one know that the six perfections are taught in
this order?”
“Avalokiteśvara, it is because the former is the support on which the latter
is established, and so on and so forth. By not fixating on their bodies and
possessions, bodhisattvas acquire discipline. By maintaining their discipline,
they take possession of patience. Through patience, they engage in
diligence. By having engaged in diligence, they establish meditative
absorption. Once meditative absorption is established, they will obtain the
supramundane wisdom.”

9.12

“Blessed One, of how many kinds are these perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, each of these perfections is of three kinds:
1. “The three kinds of generosity are the gift of Dharma, the gift of material
objects, and the gift of fearlessness.
2. “The three kinds of discipline are the discipline that turns away from
what is not virtuous, the discipline that engages in virtue, and the discipline
that engages in benefiting beings.
3. “The three kinds of patience are the patience of enduring harm, the
patience of not considering [one’s own] suffering, and the patient
acceptance of Dharma by means of reflection.287
4. “The three kinds of diligence are the diligence that is like armor, the
diligence to practice virtue, and the diligence to benefit beings.
5. “The three kinds of meditative absorption are the meditative absorption
of blissful abiding that, nonconceptual and peaceful, is an antidote to
defilements and suffering, the meditative absorption that brings about good
qualities, and the meditative absorption that accomplishes the welfare of
beings. [F.44.a]
6. “The three kinds of wisdom are the wisdom that takes the conventional
truth as its referential object, the wisdom that takes the ultimate truth as its
referential object, and the wisdom that takes the welfare of beings as its
referential object.”

9.13

“Blessed One, why are the perfections called ‘perfections’?”

“Avalokiteśvara, this is for five reasons. The perfections are without
attachment, disinterested, free from faults, nonconceptual, and dedication of
merit:
1. “Being without attachment, they are completely devoid of attachment to
factors adverse to themselves.
2. “Being disinterested, they are free from thoughts fixating on results or
on some reward obtained from their accomplishment.
3. “Being free from faults, they are not involved with afflicted phenomena
and lack unskillful means.
4. “Being nonconceptual, they are free from any literal assumption of
having a defining characteristic specific to them.
5. “Being dedication of merit, they are the aspiration for the result of the
bodhisattva

path

by

having

produced

and

accumulated288

these

perfections.”
9.14

“Blessed One, what are the factors adverse to the perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that there are six factors: (1)
considering as beneficial the joy produced by desirous objects, (2) indulging
into pleasurable activities through one’s body, speech, or mind, (3) not
enduring contempt with patience, (4) invoking merit to justify one’s lack of
diligence, (5) being distracted by occupations, entertainment, and people,
and (6) considering as beneficial the conventional mental elaborations
arising from what one sees, hears, thinks, or is conscious of.”

9.15

“Blessed One, what is the result of the maturation of these perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, [F.44.b] you should know that there are six: (1) great
wealth, (2) rebirth in pleasant destinies, (3) happiness and satisfaction from
peace and concord, (4) sovereignty over beings, (5) the absence of physical
harm, and (6) the renown of having great powers.”

9.16

“Blessed One, how are these perfections involved with afflicted
phenomena?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are involved through four practices: (1) the practice
of the perfections without compassion, (2) the improper practice of the
perfections, (3) the irregular practice of the perfections, and (4) the negligent
practice of the perfections.
“The improper practice of the perfections occurs when the practice of one
of these perfections impairs the practice of the other perfections.”

9.17

“Blessed One, what are unskillful means?”
“Avalokiteśvara, the bodhisattvas assist beings by means of these
perfections. If they do not establish beings in virtue once they have pulled
them from nonvirtuous states and instead are satisfied to merely provide
material objects to them, this is unskillful means. Why? Avalokiteśvara, one
does not assist beings by merely doing this. It is like this: excrements,

whether in large or small quantity, cannot be made to smell good by any
method289 whatsoever. Likewise, no method that merely supports beings
with material objects can make happy those who are suffering because their
nature is to experience the suffering arising from being conditioned.290 In
contrast, establishing them in virtue is the best and only way to benefit
them.”
9.18

“Blessed One, how many kinds of purification are [included] in these
perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, I did not state that there were other purifications apart
from the five kinds [I have already mentioned].291 However, in relation to
what I have already explained, [F.45.a] I will clarify for you the (1) general
and (2) specific purifications included in the perfections.
1. “You should know that the general purifications that are common to all
perfections include seven points: (1) bodhisattvas do not seek to make a
profit from others through the teachings on the bodhisattva path; (2) they do
not produce wrong conceptions with regard to these teachings; (3) with
respect to these teachings, they do not give rise to indecision or doubts as to
whether they will attain awakening or not; (4) they do not praise themselves,
nor do they blame others or despise them; (5) they do not generate arrogance
or carelessness; (6) they are not satisfied with only limited or inferior
attainments; and (7) they are not stingy or envious of others because of these
teachings.
2. “You should know that the purifications specific to each perfection also
includes seven points:
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
generosity are as follows: (1) bodhisattvas practice generosity that is the
purification of generosity through the purification292 of the object that is the
gift, and (2–7) they practice generosity that is the purification of generosity
through the purification of discipline, view, mind, speech, knowledge, and
stains. Thus, as I have just explained, the purifications included in the
perfection of generosity that bodhisattvas obtain and practice constitute the
seven aspects of the purification of generosity.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
discipline are as follows: (1) bodhisattvas are skilled in all aspects of the
foundation of training related to vows, (2) they are skilled in removing
transgressions, (3) their discipline is free from doubts, (4) they have a firm
discipline, (5) they maintain discipline in all circumstances, (6) they engage
in discipline at all times, and (7) they engage in the training by correctly
practicing the foundations of training. These are the seven aspects of the
purification of discipline.

“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of patience
are as follows: (1) when confronted with any kind of adversity, bodhisattvas
do not waver because they are confident in the maturation of their karma;
[F.45.b] (2) they do not engage in harming others by abusing, insulting,
striking, intimidating, or criticizing them in order to retaliate; (3) they do not
hold grudges; (4) when accused,293 they do not give rise to defilements; (5)
they themselves do not indulge in accusations; (6) they do not practice
patience with a mind that is fearful of consequences or interested; and (7)
they do not fail to accomplish others’ benefit. These are the seven
purifications of patience.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
diligence are as follows: (1) bodhisattvas understand the equanimity of
diligence; (2) with reference to diligence, they neither praise themselves nor
deprecate others; (3–6) they are powerful, diligent, enthusiastic, and
resolute; and (7) they never cease to be diligent with respect to virtuous
qualities. These are the seven purifications of diligence.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of
meditative absorption are (1) the meditative absorption in the concentration
that understands phenomenal appearance, (2) the perfect meditative
absorption

in

concentration, (3) the

meditative

absorption

in

the

concentration that has these two aspects, (4) the meditative absorption in the
spontaneously arising concentration, (5) the meditative absorption in the
concentration without support, (6) the meditative absorption in the
concentration that produces flexibility, and (7) the meditative absorption in
the concentration in the boundless practice of the referential objects
corresponding to the teachings on the bodhisattva path. These are the seven
purifications of meditative absorption.
“The seven points of the purification included in the perfection of wisdom
are as follows: (1) Once they have abandoned the extremes of
superimposition and negation by means of wisdom, bodhisattvas emerge
[from cyclic existence] through the middle path. (2) On account of this
wisdom, they realize the very meaning of the gate to liberation exactly as it
is, namely, the threefold gate to liberation: emptiness, wishlessness, and
appearancelessness. (3) They realize exactly as it is the very meaning of
essence, namely, the threefold essence: the imaginary, the other-dependent,
and the actual. (4) They realize exactly as it is the very meaning of
essencelessness, namely, the threefold essencelessness regarding defining
characteristics, arising, and the ultimate. [F.46.a] (5) They realize exactly as it
is the very meaning of the conventional truth in relation to the five
sciences.294 (6) They realize exactly as it is the very meaning of the ultimate
truth with respect to the seven aspects of true reality. (7) They frequently

abide in the unique approach of the nonconceptual state free of mental
elaborations. By means of the insight that takes countless universal
teachings as its referential object, they correctly accomplish the attainment
resulting from the practice of the teachings that are in harmony with
Dharma. You should know that these are the seven purifications of
meditative absorption.”
9.19

“Blessed One, what is the function of each of these five purifications?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that the five functions are as follows:
(1) Having no attachment, the bodhisattvas continuously practice the
perfections in this life. Because they practice them with enthusiasm, they are
conscientious. (2) Being disinterested, they obtain the cause for the careful
practice of these perfections in their future lives. (3) Free of any wrongdoing,
they practice the perfect, pure, and stainless perfections. (4) Unburdened by
conceptions, they swiftly perfect the perfections through their skillful means.
(5) Because they transfer their merit, they will attain in all their future lives
the inexhaustible perfections together with the desirable results produced
by the maturation of their karma, until they obtain the unsurpassable,
complete and perfect awakening.”

9.20

“Blessed One, what is the vastness of the bodhisattvas’ practice of these
perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, bodhisattvas are without attachment and disinterested,
and they transfer their merit.”
“In what way are they without afflictions?”
“They are free of any wrongdoing and conceptions.”
“In what way are they stainless?”
“They act as they mentally inspect.”
“In what way are they immovable?”
“They are said to be immovable because this is the nature of those who
have entered the stages of a bodhisattva.” [F.46.b]
“In what way are the perfections utterly pure?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are included within the tenth stage and the Buddha
Stage.”

9.21

“Blessed One, why is the desirable result of the maturation resulting from
the practice of the perfections always inexhaustible 295 in the case of the
bodhisattvas? Why do they obtain this inexhaustibility through the
perfections?”
“Avalokiteśvara, it is because they practice each perfection296 in
dependence upon the others.”

9.22

“Blessed One, why is it that bodhisattvas do not have faith in the desirable
result of the maturation resulting from the practice of the perfections in the
way they have faith in the perfections?”

“Avalokiteśvara, this is due to five reasons: (1) The perfections are the
cause for the highest bliss and happiness, (2) they are the cause for the
benefit of oneself and others, (3) they are the cause for the desirable result of
their maturation in future lives, (4) they are the foundation of the freedom
from afflictions, and (5) they have the nature of immutability.”
9.23

“Blessed One, what are their specific powers?”
“Avalokiteśvara, you should know that their specific powers have the
following four qualities: (1) When the bodhisattvas practice the perfections,
they eliminate adverse factors, such as greed, faulty discipline, mental
agitation, laziness, distraction, and wrong views; (2) they will attain the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening; (3) in this life, they will
benefit themselves as well as beings; and (4) in future lives they will attain
the desirable result of their maturation, which is vast and inexhaustible.”

9.24

“Blessed One, from what cause do these perfections arise? What are their
result and benefit?”
“Avalokiteśvara, the perfections have compassion as their cause. As result,
they have the desirable result of their maturation and [F.47.a] the result
accomplishing the benefit of beings. As benefit, they have the great benefit
of accomplishing the great awakening.”

9.25

“Blessed One, if the bodhisattvas have inexhaustible resources as well as
compassion for beings, why are there poor people in the world?”
“Avalokiteśvara, this is nothing but the fault resulting from beings’ own
karma. If it were not so, if no obstruction were brought about by beings’ own
faults, bodhisattvas could at all times engage in compassionate activities
toward them. As bodhisattvas have inexhaustible resources, how could the
vision of suffering manifest? Avalokiteśvara, it is like this: hungry ghosts
whose bodies are tormented by thirst perceive the waters of the ocean as a
dry and barren place. This is not the fault of the ocean but the fault resulting
from the maturation of nothing but these hungry ghosts’ own karma.
Likewise, the absence of result is not the fault of the bodhisattvas’
generosity, which is like the ocean, but the fault of beings themselves, the
fault resulting from the karma of those who are like hungry ghosts.”

9.26

“Blessed One, through which perfection do bodhisattvas apprehend
essencelessness?”297
“Avalokiteśvara, they apprehend it through the perfection of wisdom.”
“Blessed One, when they apprehend essencelessness through the
perfection of wisdom, why then do they not apprehend that essencelessness
has an essence?”298
“Avalokiteśvara, I did not declare that essencelessness is apprehended by
means of an essence.299 However, if one does not use expressions to teach, it
is impossible to explain that this essencelessness is inexpressible and

cognized

intuitively.

On

this

basis,

I

said

that

they

perceive

essencelessness.”
9.27

“Blessed One, what is called perfection, immediate perfection,300 and great
perfection?” [F.47.b]
1. “Avalokiteśvara, bodhisattvas possess virtuous qualities, generosity
and so on, that they have practiced over immeasurable periods of time. But
when defilements arise in them, they are unable to overcome them and,
instead, are overcome by them. Thus, this inferior and intermediate
aspiration on the stage where one proceeds by means of aspiration is called
perfection.
2. “Then, bodhisattvas possess virtuous qualities that they have practiced
during further immeasurable periods of time. When defilements arise in
them, these bodhisattvas overcome them and cannot be overcome by them.
Thus, taking hold of these qualities beginning with the first stage is called
immediate perfection.
3. “Next, bodhisattvas possess virtuous qualities that they have practiced
during even longer immeasurable periods of time. In the bearer of such
qualities, no defilement arises at all. Thus, taking hold of these qualities
beginning with the eighth stage is called great perfection.”301

9.28

“Blessed One, how many kinds of latent dispositions toward defilements
are there on the stages?”
“Avalokiteśvara, there are three:302
1. “The latent dispositions that destroy the factors conducive to the
manifestation of defilements are as follows: on the first five stages, the
factors conducive to the manifestation of innate defilements are non-innate
defilements. At that point, these factors do not manifest. As a consequence,
these latent dispositions are called latent dispositions that destroy the factors
conducive [to the manifestation of defilements].
2. “The latent dispositions of limited power are as follows: on the sixth and
seventh stages, subtle aspects of the latent dispositions manifest and
through practice are suppressed. Therefore, as a consequence of this subtle
manifestation, these latent dispositions are called latent dispositions of limited
power.
3. “The subtle latent dispositions are as follows: on the eighth stage and
above, defilements do not manifest at all because there only remain cognitive
obstructions to be cleared. Therefore, these latent dispositions are called
subtle latent dispositions.”

9.29

“Blessed One, how many kinds of elimination of corruption characterize
these latent dispositions?”303

“Avalokiteśvara, there are three kinds:304 (1) the elimination of superficial
corruption

characterizes

the

first and the

second type

of latent

dispositions]305 (2) the elimination of deeper corruption characterizes [F.48.a]
the third type of latent dispositions, and (3) since the elimination of the
innermost corruption is the state in which there are no latent dispositions at
all, I have taught that it is the Buddha Stage.”
9.30

“Blessed One, after how many eons are these types of corruption
eliminated?”
“Avalokiteśvara, they are abandoned within three incalculable periods of
time —within immeasurable eons, seasons, moons, half-moons, days and
nights, days, half days, hours, minutes, seconds, or split seconds.”

9.31

“Blessed One, how should the defining characteristic, the fault, and the
positive quality of defilements arising in bodhisattvas be known?”
1. “Avalokiteśvara, defilements arising in bodhisattvas have the defining
characteristic of nondefilement. Why? Because they fully realize the domain
of truth, which is only determined on the first stage. On account of this, the
defilements

of

bodhisattvas

arise

only

with

full

awareness,

not

unconsciously. Therefore, [defilements arising in bodhisattvas have] the
defining characteristic of nondefilements.
2. “Because they do not have the capacity to produce suffering in
[bodhisattvas’] own [mental] continuums, they are faultless.
3. “Because they are the cause dispelling the suffering from the world of
beings, they have boundless positive qualities.”
“Blessed One, if even the defilements arising in this way in bodhisattvas
outshine the roots of virtue produced by all beings, hearers, and solitary
realizers to such an extent, what need is there to mention their other positive
qualities?306 The supreme value of the bodhisattvas’ awakening is truly
amazing!
9.32

“Blessed One, what was your underlying intention when you declared
that the vehicle of the hearers and the Great Vehicle constitute the Single
Vehicle?” [F.48.b]
“In the vehicle of the hearers, I taught the essence of various phenomena,
such as the five aggregates, the six internal sense domains, the six external
sense domains, and so forth. In the Great Vehicle, I presented exactly these
same phenomena by teaching them in terms of a single principle, the domain
of truth. Therefore, I did not declare that [these two] vehicles are distinct
from one another. Those who conceptualize these teachings exclusively
according to their literal meaning also conceptualize these [two] vehicles as
being distinct—some by superimposing, others by negating. As a

consequence, they think that the two vehicles are contradictory307 and thus
refute one another. This is what I had in mind when I taught the Single
Vehicle.”
9.33

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“The very teachings on the nature of various phenomena
Taught in the lower and higher vehicles
Are teachings of a single principle.
This is why I did not declare the vehicles to be distinct from one another.
“Those who conceptualize according to the literal meaning of the teachings
Think that these vehicles are contradictory
As a result of their superimpositions and negations,
And so from delusion arise various opinions.
“The buddhas taught as the Great Vehicle
What is included within the stages of a bodhisattva and a buddha,
The names of these stages, and their adverse factors, specific arising,
aspiration, and training.
Those who will exert themselves in this will become buddhas.”
Then, the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
what is the name of the teaching imparted in this Dharma discourse that
unravels the Tathāgata’s intent? How should I keep it in mind?”
The Blessed One answered, “Avalokiteśvara, this is a teaching of
definitive meaning on the stages and the perfections. Keep it in mind as The
Teaching of Definitive Meaning on the Stages and the Perfections. As the Blessed
One expounded this teaching, seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas obtained
the bodhisattva’s concentration, the light of the Great Vehicle. [F.49.a]
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Avalokiteśvara—the ninth chapter.

10.

CHAPTER 10

10.1

Then the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī addressed the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
when you mention ‘the truth body of the tathāgatas,’ what is the defining
characteristic of this truth body of the tathāgatas?”
The Blessed One answered, “Mañjuśrī, the truth body of the tathāgatas is
characterized when one has fully achieved a shift in one’s basis of existence,
the emergence [from cyclic existence] through the practice of the stages and
the perfections.308 Because of the two [following] reasons, you should know
that this truth body is characterized by inconceivability: (1) it is beyond
mental elaborations and is not produced by intentional action,309 (2) while
beings are fixated on mental elaborations and produced by intentional
action.”

10.2

“Blessed One, is the shift in the hearers’ and solitary realizers’ basis of
existence also designated as the truth body?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is not.”
“Blessed One, how should it be called?”
“Mañjuśrī, it should be called the liberation body.310 With regard to the
liberation body, the tathāgatas are similar and equal to the hearers and
solitary realizers, but, on account of the truth body, they are distinctively
superior to them. This being so, they are also distinctively superior to them
in terms of the distinctively immeasurable aspect of their positive qualities.
This is not easy to illustrate with examples.”

10.3

“Blessed One, how should we consider those who have the characteristic
of manifesting themselves through the birth of a tathāgata?”
“Mañjuśrī, those who have the characteristic of the emanation body311
resemble those who manifest in the world realms. You should see them as
those whose characteristic is to be established by the sovereign power312 of
the buddhas, being fully adorned with the ornaments of the tathāgatas’
qualities. The truth body does not have this manifestation of arising.”

10.4

“Blessed One, how should we consider the skillful means employed by
the emanation body [for the sake of liberating beings from cyclic
existence]?”313 [F.49.b]
“Mañjuśrī, being conceived in a family renowned to be powerful or
honorable in all the buddha fields of the trichiliocosm, taking birth, growing
up, enjoying desirous objects, leaving home, displaying immediately the
practice of austerities, renouncing them, and displaying all the stages of the
complete and perfect awakening should be considered as the skillful means
of the emanation body.”
“Blessed One, through which teachings emanating from their sovereign
power do the tathāgatas bring to maturity those spiritually immature beings
who have been converted? How do they liberate spiritually mature beings
by means of the very referential object [taught in the Great Vehicle]?”
“Mañjuśrī, they bring them to maturity through three teachings: the
sūtras, the Vinaya, and the mātṛkās.”

10.5

“Blessed One, what are the sūtras, the Vinaya, and the mātṛkās?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is like this: sūtras are teachings that gather the subject matter
of various Dharma methods in four, nine, or twenty-nine topics.
1. “What are the four topics? They are (i) what was heard, (ii) taking
refuge, (iii) the training, and (iv) the awakening.
2. “What are the nine topics? They are (i) concepts of sentient beings, (ii)
their possessions, (iii) their birth, (iv) their existence after birth, (v) their
affliction and purification, (vi) their diversity, (vii) the teacher, (viii) the
teaching, and (ix) the assembly.
3. “What are the twenty-nine topics? They are the topics related to
affliction: (i) [the phenomena] included in the conditioned, (ii) their
progressive activity, (iii) the cause of their arising in future lives once they
have been conceptualized as a person, and (iv) the cause of their arising in
future lives once they have been conceptualized as phenomena.
“They are also the topics related to purification: [F.50.a] (v) the referential
objects that are taken as reference points;314 (vi) the exertion in [the practice
of] these very [objects]; (vii) mental abiding;315 (viii) blissful abiding in this
very life; (ix) the referential objects that liberate from all suffering; (x) the
three kinds of comprehension, which are the comprehension of the basis of
error, the comprehension of the basis of error with respect to beings’
conceptions for nonpractitioners, and the comprehension of the basis of
humility for those who practice Dharma; (xi) the basis of practice; (xii) the
actualization [of practice];316 (xiii) the practice; (xiv) [the practice] as the
central activity; (xv) its aspects; (xvi) its referential objects; (xvii) the skills in
the investigation of what has already been eliminated and what not yet been
eliminated; (xviii) [the factors] that are distractions from practice; (xix) [the

factors] that are not distractions from practice; (xx) the source of
nondistraction; (xxi) the yoga of clear mindfulness 317 that is protected by318
the practice; (xxii) the benefit of practice; (xxiii) its stability; (xiv) the
unification with the lord of the noble [practice]; (xv) the unification with its
retinue and entourage; (xxvi) the realization of true reality; (xxvii) the
attainment of nirvāṇa; (xxviii) the fact that the well-expounded Dharma and
Vinaya are superior to the correct views of mundane beings and all
nonpractitioners; and (xxix) the impairments resulting from not practicing.
Thus, Mañjuśrī, without practicing the well-expounded Dharma and Vinaya,
impairments will ensue, and this is not because one has faulty views.
10.6

“Mañjuśrī, the Vinaya is my teaching on prātimokṣa for hearers and
bodhisattvas, as well as that which is associated with it.” [F.50.b]
“Blessed One, how many topics are included in [the teaching on the]
prātimokṣa of bodhisattvas?”
“Mañjuśrī, there are seven topics: (1) the teachings on the ceremony of
taking [the vows of the bodhisattva discipline], (2) the teachings on the basis
of serious downfalls,319 (3) the teachings on the basis of transgressions, (4)
the teachings on the nature of transgressions, (5) the teachings on the nature
of what are not transgressions, (6) the teachings on the emergence from
transgressions, and (7) the teachings on the abandonment of the vows.

10.7

“Mañjuśrī, the mātṛkās are the teachings that I imparted and categorized
into eleven topics. What are these eleven topics? They are (1) the defining
characteristic of the conventional, (2) the defining characteristic of the
ultimate, (3) the defining characteristic of referential objects consisting of the
awakening factors, (4) the defining characteristic of their features; (5) the
defining characteristic of the[ir] nature, (6) the defining characteristic of their
result, (7) the defining characteristic of the description of the experience of
them, (8) the defining characteristic of the factors disrupting them,320 (9) the
defining characteristic of the factors conducive to them, (10) the defining
characteristic of the defects related to them, and (11) the defining
characteristic of their benefit.
1. “Mañjuśrī, consider that the defining characteristic of the conventional
has three subtopics: (1) the teaching on persons, (2) the teaching on the
imaginary nature, and (3) the teaching on the activity, movement, and action
of phenomena.
2. “Consider the defining characteristic of the ultimate in terms of the
teaching on the seven aspects of true reality.321
3. “Consider the defining characteristic of referential objects in terms of the
teaching on all the things corresponding to cognitive objects.

4. “Consider the defining characteristic of [their] features in terms of the
teaching on the eight features of the analysis of cognitive objects. What are
these eight? They are (i) the truth of cognitive objects, (ii) their
determination,322 (iii) their faults, (iv) their positive qualities, (v) the methods
for analyzing, (vi) the processes related to them, (vii) the principles of reason,
and (viii) the condensed and extensive presentations of cognitive objects.
i. “With respect to these eight points, the truth of cognitive objects is true
reality.
ii. “The determination of cognitive objects consists in establishing the
person or the imaginary essence [F.51.a] or in establishing categorical,
analytical, interrogative, and dismissive answers as well as secret
instructions.323
iii. “The faults of cognitive objects are the defects of phenomena related to
affliction, which I have taught in several ways.
iv. “The positive qualities of cognitive objects are the benefits arising from
phenomena related to purification, which I have taught in several ways.
v. “The methods for analyzing cognitive objects includes six points: (a) the
method for analyzing the meaning of true reality; (b) the method for
analyzing attainments; (c) the method for analyzing explanations; (d) the
method for analyzing the elimination of the two extremes; (e) the method for
analyzing the inconceivable; and (f) the method for analyzing the underlying
intention.
vi. “The processes related to cognitive objects are the three times, the three
defining characteristics of the conditioned, and the four conditions.
vii. “There are four principles of reason in the analysis of cognitive objects:
(a) the principle of reason based on dependence, (b) the principle of reason
based on cause and effect, (c) the principle of reason based on logical proof,
and (d) the principle of reason based on the nature of phenomena itself.
a. “The arising of conditioned phenomena and the causes for their being
expressed through conventions, as well as related causal conditions,
constitute the principle of reason based on dependence.
b. “The causes that will bring about a result,324 a completion, or an action
once phenomena have arisen, as well as related causal conditions, constitute
the principle of reason based on cause and effect.
c. “The causes establishing the meaning and bringing about the valid
understanding of the thesis,325 the demonstration, and the statement of a
proof, as well as related causal conditions, constitute the principle of reason
based on logical proof.326 This logical proof is, moreover, of two kinds: valid
and invalid. Among these, five are characterized as valid327 and seven as
invalid. What are the five logical proofs characterized as valid? They are the
logical proofs characterized by (I) a perception that is a direct cognition of

the thing to establish,328 (II) a perception that is a direct cognition of
something existing in dependence on the thing to establish,329 (III) a
demonstration through an instance belonging to the same class,330 [F.51.b]
(IV) an actual demonstration, and (V) a citation from a valid scripture.331
“With regard to those five logical proofs:
I. “The logical proof characterized by the perception that is a direct
cognition of the thing to establish consists [for example] in perceiving
through a direct cognition that all conditioned phenomena are impermanent,
suffering, and without a self as well as anything conforming to this.332
II. “The logical proof characterized by a direct cognition of something
existing in dependence on the thing to establish consists in inferring
something not directly perceptible by means of something 333 [directly
perceptible], as well as in anything conforming to this, [for example], (A) the
perception as a direct cognition of the principle of impermanence that exists
in dependence on the things to establish, [namely,] the momentariness of all
conditioned phenomena, the existence of a next life, and the consequence of
good and bad deeds;334 (B) the perception as direct cognition of the diversity
of beings that exists in dependence on the thing to establish, [namely,] the
diversity of karma; or (C) the direct cognition of the happiness and suffering
of beings that exists in dependence on the things to establish, [namely,]
virtue and nonvirtue].335
III. “You should know that the logical proof characterized by a
demonstration through an instance belonging to the same class of
phenomena336 consists in anything conforming to this, [for example] in the
demonstration of external and internal conditioned phenomena through (A)
the perception of death and rebirth, being born and other forms of
suffering,337 and causal dependence,338 which are established as facts in all
worlds or (B) the perception of wealth and misery, which are established as
facts in all worlds, including those of future lives.339
IV. “Thus, you should know that a logical proof characterized by one of
the three proofs mentioned above 340 is an actual demonstration because it is
conclusive with respect to the thing that must be established.
V. “Mañjuśrī, you should know that the logical proof characterized by a
citation from a valid scripture consists in the words taught by quoting the
omniscient ones, such as ‘Nirvāṇa is peace’ and other similar statements.
[F.52.a]
“Therefore, on account of these five kinds of characteristics, an analysis of
cognitive objects founded on the principle of reason based on logical proof is
valid.341 Because such an analysis is valid, you should rely on it.”
“Blessed One, how many qualities do those we should consider as having
the defining characteristics of the omniscient tathāgatas have?”

“Mañjuśrī, they have five qualities: (A) wherever they manifest, they are
renowned in this world for their omniscience; (B) they have the thirty-two
marks of a great being; (C) by means of their ten powers, they eliminate all
qualms affecting beings; (D) the words of the Dharma they teach through the
four kinds of assurance cannot be refuted or disputed by any opponent; (E)
on the basis of their Dharma and Vinaya, the eightfold noble path as well as
the four noble truths manifest for those who have renounced cyclic
existence.342 Thus, you should know that their manifestation, marks,
elimination of doubts, freedom from refutations and disputes, and support
[for those who have renounced cyclic existence] constitute the defining
characteristic of the omniscient tathāgatas.
“Thus, the principle of reason based on logical proof is valid on account of
the five characteristics included within these valid cognitions: direct
cognitions, inferences, and authoritative scriptures.343
“What are the seven logical proofs characterized as invalid? They are the
logical proofs characterized by (I) a perception that conforms with
something other than the thing to be established,344 (II) a perception that
does not conform with anything other than the thing to establish,345 (III) a
perception that conforms with all things,346 (IV) a perception that does not
conform with anything,347 (V) a demonstration through an instance
belonging to a different class of phenomena,348 (VI) a demonstration that is
not actually demonstrating anything, and (VII) a citation drawn from an
invalid scripture.
“The logical proof characterized by a perception that does not conform
with anything 349 is ascertained when the defining characteristics of the
proof and the premise do not conform with one another because they are
incompatible in terms of reason, essence, karma, quality, or cause and
effect.350 [F.52.b]
“Mañjuśrī, the logical proof characterized by a perception that does not
conform with anything 351 is comprised by the logical proof characterized by
a perception that conforms with something other than the thing to be
established352 and similar instances. This proof is therefore inconclusive with
respect to the thing to establish.353 This is called an unestablished logical
proof.354
“Moreover, the logical proof characterized by a perception that conforms
with all things 355 is comprised by the logical proof characterized by a
perception that does not conform with anything other than the thing to
establish356 and similar instances. This proof is therefore inconclusive with
respect to the thing to establish. This is also called an unestablished logical
proof.357

“Because these logical proofs are not established, the analysis is invalid
according to the principle of reason based on logical proof. Since this
analysis is invalid, you should not rely on it. You should know that the
logical proof characterized by a citation from an invalid scripture is invalid
by nature.
d. “Whether tathāgatas manifest or not, the constancy of the domain of
truth, the nature of phenomena, on account of the constancy of phenomena,
constitutes the principle of reason based on the nature of phenomena.358
viii. “The condensed and the extensive presentation of cognitive objects
consists of first summarizing, then analyzing words and sections of the
teaching, and finally concluding the explanation.
5. “The defining characteristic of the nature of awakening factors consists
in the apprehension of a referential object together with its aspects, as I have
taught, such as the awakening factors, the four applications of mindfulness,
and so on.
6. “The defining characteristic of their result is the accomplishment of their
result, the mundane and supramundane positive qualities, by abandoning
the defilements associated with the mundane or the supramundane
phenomena.
7. “The defining characteristic of accounts telling how one experiences
them as one proclaims them, explains them, and correctly teach them to
others is the analytical knowledge of the gnosis 359 that liberates within true
reality.
8. “The defining characteristic of the factors disrupting them is the
afflicted phenomenon in the form of an obstacle to the practice of these very
awakening factors. [F.53.a]
9. “The defining characteristic of the factors conducive to them is the
phenomenon useful to [enhancing] them.
10.” The defining characteristic of defects related to them is the fault
interrupting them.
11. “Mañjuśrī, you should know that the defining characteristic of their
benefit consists in their corresponding positive qualities.”
10.8

Then, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī further said to the Blessed One, “Blessed
One, please explain the meaning of the formula through which bodhisattvas
comply with the underlying intention360 of the profound Dharma expounded
by the tathāgatas, the complete meaning of the sūtras, the Vinaya, and the
mātṛkās that is not known by those not following you.”
“Mañjuśrī, listen. I will explain to you the complete meaning of the
formula so that bodhisattvas will in this way understand my underlying
intention. Mañjuśrī, the possessors of qualities resulting from affliction and
purification361 are all without movement and without a person. This is why I

taught that all phenomena are in every respect beyond activity. It is not the
case that the possessors of qualities resulting from affliction first became
afflicted and will then become purified from these afflictions or that the
possessors of qualities resulting from purification have become purified from
afflictions they previously acquired. Thus, foolish ordinary beings rely on
views resulting from their latent dispositions, on account of which they
wrongly conceive the body afflicted by corruption as the essence of
phenomena and persons. As a consequence, reifying [the ego through
concepts such as] ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ they mistakenly conceive of the following
notions: ‘I see,’ ‘I hear,’ ‘I smell,’ ‘I taste,’ ‘I touch,’ ‘I am conscious,’ ‘I eat,’ ‘I
do,’ ‘I am afflicted,’ and ‘I am purified.’ [F.53.b]
“Thus, those who understand this fact as it really is abandon the body
afflicted by corruption and instead obtain the body that is not a support for
any defilement, being pure, free from mental elaborations, unconditioned,
and unproduced by intentional action. Mañjuśrī, you should know that this
is the complete meaning of the formula.”
Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“The possessors of qualities resulting from affliction and purification
Are all without movement362 and without a person;
Therefore, I declare them to be without activity,
As they are neither purified nor afflicted, be it in the past or the future.
“Relying on views resulting from their latent dispositions,
On account of which they wrongly conceive the body afflicted by corruption,
They reify [the ego through concepts such as] ‘I’ and ‘mine.’
As a consequence, notions arise, such as ‘I see,’ ‘I eat,’ ‘I do,’ ‘I am afflicted,’
and ‘I am purified.’
“Thus, those who understand this fact as it really is
Abandon the body afflicted by corruption
And instead will obtain a body that is not a basis for any defilement,
Being free from mental elaborations and unconditioned.”363
10.9

“Blessed One, how should we know the defining characteristic of the arising
of the tathāgatas’ mind?”
“Mañjuśrī, tathāgatas are not characterized by mind, thought, or
cognition.364 However, you should know that, similar to an emanation,365 the
tathāgatas’ mind arises in the way of something that is not produced by
intentional action.”
“Blessed One, if the truth body of the tathāgatas is not produced at all by
intentional action, how then could their mind arise without being produced
by intentional action?”366

“Mañjuśrī, their mind arises on account of a previous intentional action,
namely, the practice of skillful means and wisdom. Mañjuśrī, it is like this:
although awakening from a state of sleep in which there is no thought
ensues [spontaneously] without resulting from intentional action, [F.54.a]
one will awaken due to previous intentional actions. Although the
emergence from the absorption in the state of cessation is not produced by
intentional action, one will emerge from it merely due to previous intentional
actions. Just as the mind arises from a state of sleep or from the absorption in
the state of cessation, you should know that the tathāgatas’ mind also arises
due to previous intentional actions such as the practice of skillful means and
wisdom.”
“Blessed One, should we say that the mind emanated by tathāgatas exists
or not?”
“Mañjuśrī, [their] mind neither exists nor does not exist, because it is
causally independent and causally dependent.”367
“Blessed One, what is the sphere of activity of the tathāgatas? What is the
domain368 of the tathāgatas? Should we consider these two as distinct?”
“Mañjuśrī, the sphere of activity of the tathāgatas consists in the pure
buddha realms, the arrayed ornaments of inconceivable and boundless
positive qualities common to all tathāgatas. The domain of the tathāgatas
comprises five domains: the domain of the surrounding universe, the domain
of beings, the domain of Dharma, the domain of discipline, and the domain of
methods of discipline.369 There is a distinction between the two.”
10.10

“Blessed One, how should we understand the defining characteristic of
the tathāgatas’ complete and perfect awakening, of their turning of the
wheel of Dharma, and of their great parinirvāṇa?”
“Mañjuśrī, the tathāgatas are characterized by nonduality.370 They are
neither completely and perfectly awakened nor not completely and perfectly
awakened; [F.54.b] they neither turn the wheel of Dharma nor do not turn the
wheel of Dharma; they neither [attain] the great parinirvāṇa nor do not attain
the great parinirvāṇa. This is because the truth body is utterly pure and the
emanation body constantly manifests.”
“Blessed One, why should we consider that the merit produced by beings
on account of seeing, hearing, or serving the tathāgatas’ emanation body
arises from the tathāgatas?”
“Mañjuśrī, it is because these activities consist in taking a superior
referential object thanks to the tathāgatas, and also because the emanation
body is the tathāgatas’ sovereign power.”
“Blessed One, since this does not seem to be produced by intentional
action, why is it that the great light of gnosis manifests in beings solely
through the truth body of the tathāgatas and that innumerable emanated

reflections also manifest [as the tathāgatas’ emanation body], while this light
and its reflections do not manifest from the hearers’ and solitary realizers’
liberation body?”
“Mañjuśrī, while this does not seem to be produced by intentional action,
on account of the power of very strong beings and the force of beings’
karma, a great light manifests to beings from water and fire crystals
produced from the disks of the moon and sun. However, it does not manifest
from water and fire crystals produced from other sources. From a precious
gem that has been well polished through [intentional] action, reflections
corresponding to its engraving manifest [when it is placed before a light
source]. However, they do not manifest from another unpolished gem.
Likewise, because the truth body of the tathāgatas also is established by
having been purified through the practice of skillful means and insight
focusing on the immeasurable domain of truth, [F.55.a] the great light of
gnosis manifests in beings, and innumerable emanated reflections arise.
However, they do not manifest from the hearers’ and solitary realizers’
liberation body.”
10.11

“Blessed One, you said that, through the force of the tathāgatas’ and
bodhisattvas’ sovereign power, one can obtain an excellent body in the
realm of desire, such as that of a warrior or a brahman, a body that is like a
great sāla tree, or the excellent body of a god residing in the realm of desire,
the realm of form, or the realm of the formless. Blessed One, what was your
underlying intention with regard to this?”
“Mañjuśrī, by means of their sovereign power, tathāgatas teach as they
are the path and practices through which one obtains all these excellent
bodies. Those accomplishing these path and practices will always obtain all
these perfect bodies, while those who reject or denigrate these path and
practices, as well as those who have animosity or resentment toward them,
will always obtain all kinds of miserable bodies upon their death. Mañjuśrī,
on account of this skillful means, you should know in this way that, because
of the sovereign power of the tathāgatas, one will be reborn in a perfect body
as well as in a miserable one.”

10.12

“Blessed One, in the universes that are impure and pure, what is
abundant? What is rare?”
“Mañjuśrī, in the universes that are impure, [F.55.b] eight things are
abundant and two are rare. Abundant are (1) followers of traditions other
than mine; (2) suffering beings; (3) beings who are different in terms of
lineages, families, and communities or wealth and poverty; (4) beings
engaging into wrongdoing; (5) beings who have lost their discipline; (6)
beings in bad destinies; (7) followers of inferior vehicles; and (8)

bodhisattvas with inferior intentions and practices. Rare are (1) the actions of
bodhisattvas having superior intentions and practices and (2) the
manifestation of tathāgatas.
“Mañjuśrī, in the universes that are pure, it is the opposite of this. You
should know that these eight things are rare and these two things
abundant.”
Then, the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
what is the name of the teaching imparted in this Dharma discourse that
unravels the Tathāgata’s intent? How should I keep it in mind?”
The Blessed One answered, “Mañjuśrī, this is a teaching of definitive
meaning establishing the deeds of the tathāgatas. Keep it in mind as The
Teaching of Definitive Meaning Establishing the Deeds of the Tathāgatas. As the
Blessed One expounded this teaching, seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas
obtained the perfect analytical knowledge of the truth body.
After the Blessed One had spoken these words, the prince Mañjuśrī
together with the entire retinue of gods, humans, demigods, and gandharvas
rejoiced and praised the words of the Blessed One.
The [tenth chapter of the bodhisattva Mañjuśrī] called “The Chapter Establishing the
Positive Qualities [of the Tathāgatas]” of [the sūtra of] the Great Vehicle called
“Unraveling the Intent” is concluded.

ab.

ABBREVIATIONS
Bd

Bardan (Zanskar) canonical collection

C

Choné xylograph Kangyur

Cbeta

Chinese Electronic Buddhist Association, (www.cbeta.org
(http://www.cbeta.org))

Cz

Chizhi Kangyur

D

Degé xylograph Kangyur

Dd

Dodedrak Kangyur

Dk

Dongkarla Kangyur

Do

Dolpo canonical collection

F

Phukdrak manuscript Kangyur

Go

Gondhla (Lahaul) canonical collection

Gt

Gangteng Kangyur

H

Lhasa xylograph Kangyur

He

Hemis I Kangyur

J

’jang sa tham/Lithang xylograph Kangyur

Kʙ

Berlin manuscript Kangyur

Kǫ774

Peking 1737 xylograph Kangyur

L

London (Shelkar) manuscript Kangyur

Lg

Lang mdo Kangyur

Mvyut

Mahāvyutpatti

N

Narthang xylograph Kangyur

Ng

Namgyal Kangyur

Np

Neyphug Kangyur

O

Tawang Kangyur

Pj

Phajoding I Kangyur

Pz

Phajoding II Kangyur

R

Ragya Kangyur

S

Stok manuscript Kangyur

Saṃdh.

Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra

Saṃdhdh Dunhuang manuscript: Stein Tib. n°194 (49 folios) and Stein Tib.
n°683 (1 folio) (Hakamaya 1984–1987)
T
Taishō
676

Tokyo manuscript Kangyur

解深密經, translated by Xuanzang (596–664 ᴄᴇ)

TrBh

Sthiramati’s Triṃśikāvijñaptibhāṣyam

U

Urga xylograph Kangyur

V

Ulaanbaatar manuscript Kangyur

VD

Degé; xylograph of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi
from the Tengyur

VG

Golden; xylograph of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi
from the Tengyur

VP

Peking; xylograph of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi
from the Tengyur

VinSg

Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi

X

Basgo manuscript Kangyur

YBht P
’i

Tibetan translation of Acarya Asanga’s Yogācārabhūmi from the
Peking Tengyur (n°. 5540, sems-tsam, ’i 143aI-382a5 (vol. I l l : 121217)

Z

Shey Palace manuscript Kangyur

n.

NOTES

n.1

See glossary entry “ultimate.”

n.2

See Brunnhölzl 2018, p. 1590, n. 89 on this point.

n.3

The numbering of paragraphs of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra follows Lamotte’s
critical edition.

n.4

See Radich 2007, p. 1257 on the relationship between āśrayaparivṛtti and
dauṣṭhulyakāya. Saṃdh. is the only text in the entire Kangyur in which the
term dauṣṭhulyakāya is found.

n.5

In bold are textual resources I used to translate the text into English.

n.6

See Powers 2015. Unfortunately, I haven’t been able to consult this reference
work at the time of completing this translation.

n.7

Here is a list of the sigla I used to identify the various witnesses of Saṃdh.:
(1) Witnesses of the sūtra found in the available Kangyurs and canonical
collections (MsK = manuscript Kangyur, PK = xylograph): Kʙ: Berlin MsK, C:
Choné PK, Cz: Chizhi, D: Degé PK, Dd: Dodedrak, Dk: Dongkarla, F: Phukdrag
MsK, H: Lhasa PK, Gt: Gangteng, He: Hemis I, J: ’jang sa tham/Lithang PK,
L: London (Shelkar) MsK, Lg: Lang mdo, N: Narthang PK, Ng: Namgyal, Np:
Neyphug, O: Tawang, Pj: Phajoding I, Pz: Phajoding II, Kǫ: Peking 1737 PK,
R: Ragya, S: Stok MsK, T: Tokyo MsK, U: Urga PK, V: Ulaanbaatar MsK, W:
Wangli supplement, X: Basgo MsK, Z: Shey Palace MsK. Other canonical
collections: Ba: Basgo fragments (Ladakh), Bd: Bardan (Zanskar), Go:
Gondhla (Lahaul), Do: Dolpo. Source: http://www.rkts.org (last accessed on
July 20, 2020). I am following the typology of Kangyur groups suggested by
rKTs (Vienna University). I would like to warmly thank Professor Helmut
Tauscher and Bruno Lainé for making available to me the editions I used for

this translation project. For a general discussion of some Tibetan sources, see
Skilling 1994, p. 775.
(2) Xylographs of the Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī of the Yogācārabhūmi from the
Tengyur: VD Degé, VG Golden, VP Peking. My thanks go to Kojirō Katō for
having shared with me the bibliographical detail of these witnesses. The
Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī is also available in Chinese under the following title:

師地論卷第七⼗六攝決擇分.
n.8

瑜伽

For the reference of possible additional folios, see Chayet 2005, p. 67
(n°615—1 folio, n°590—6 folios).

n.9

解深密經疏 (ZZ369) is a text originally composed in Chinese that has been
translated into Tibetan. On Wonch’uk’s life and works, see Powers 1992a.

n.10

I would like to warmly thank Zhuoran Xie (Vienna University) for her
assistance in reading this text.

n.11

See also Katō 2011 for textual variations.

n.12

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 425ff.

n.13

See Schmithausen 2014, pp. 419–20, n. 1852. On necessary adjustments to
Lamotte’s rendition of the original Sanskrit terms, see Hakayama 1984, p. 180
and Delhey 2013.

n.14

See Tillemans 1997 for a review of Powers 1995. From a general perspective,
it seems that Powers chose to ignore the work and methodological approach
of Lamotte and Frauwallner.

n.15

See Schmithausen 1987 and 2014, Delhey 2013, and Skilling 2013 on the
simile of the illusionist (māyākāra), which is also included inter alia in the
Māyājāla, a sūtra also quoted in the Yogācārabhūmi.

n.16

On this issue, see Brunnhölzl 2018, pp. 414–18, n. 5.

n.17

See Steinkellner 1989 and Powers 1992a, 1992b, and 1998. For a review of
Powers 1998, refer to Wedemeyer 2003.

n.18

See for instance Hopkins 1999, 2002, and 2006.

n.19

See Lamotte 1935, p. 12ff., Ware 1937, Edgerton 1937, Edgerton 1953, p. 558,
and later Keenan 1980, p. 126, Powers 1991a, and Powers 1993b, p. 28ff.

n.20

Research relevant to terminological choices, syntactic reading of complex
passages, and interpretation of the meaning includes Powers 1991b, 1991c,

1993b, pp. 41–77 (chapters 1 to 4); Tillemans 1997 (chapter 1); Matsuda 2013
on Sanskrit terms (chapter 2); Wayman 1974, Tillemans 1997, Mathes 2007,
Matsuda 2013 (chapter 3); Katō 2002, Lusthaus 2002, Waldron 2003, Buescher
2007, 2008, Muller 2011, Schmithausen 1987 and 2014, Brunnhölzl 2018
(chapter 5); Frauwallner 1969, Takahashi 2006, Schmithausen 2014 (chapter
6); Frauwallner 1969, Tucci 1971, Tillemans 1997, Mathes 2007, Schmithausen
2014, Brunnhölzl 2018 (chapter 7); Takasaki 1966, Lamotte 1970, Lin 2010,
Matsuda 2013, Schmithausen 1984, 1987, 2005, and 2014 (chapter 8);
Obermiller 1933, Matsuda 1995 (chapter 9); Braarvig 1985, Kapstein 1988,
Steinkellner 1989, Sakuma 1990, Yoshimizu 1996, Xing 2005, Lin 2010,
Yoshimizu 2010 (chapter 10).
n.21

For a detailed introduction to this text, see Steinkellner 1989.
See Billeter 2014. I would like to thank Professor Tom Tillemans for having

n.22

drawn my attention to Billeter’s principles of translation.

n.23

See Edgerton 1953, p. 102.

n.24

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 400, n. 1770.

n.25

See Lamotte 1935, p. 174.

n.26

See Mvyut 4414.

n.27

See Vinay and Darbelnet 1958.

n.28

Or even “Yep,” “I’m with you,” “So true,” etc.

n.29

“Une compilation assez maladroite”; see Lamotte 1935, p. 17. For an
extensive discussion on the date and composition of Saṃdh., see Lamotte,
pp. 14–25. See also Schmithausen 2014, p. 354ff. regarding the relation
between the various chapters of Saṃdh.

n.30

See Schmithausen 2014, pp. 354–55.

n.31

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 365.

n.32

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 359.

n.33

On the usage and various shades of meaning of vijñapti, see Hall 1986.

n.34

rin po che sna bdun does not refer to jewels only, as found in Lamotte (1935)
and Keenan (2000). I follow here Powers (1995), Cornu (2005), and Cleary
(1999).

n.35

The logical subject of ’jig rten gyi khams dpag tu med pa rgyas par ’gengs pa’i ’od
zer chen po shin tu mnga’ ba is the palace (khang). Cornu (2005) and Keenan
(2000) seem to read this phrase as a qualifier for the seven precious
substances.

n.36

The first paragraph of the nidāna is a presentation of the place where the
Buddha is dwelling. As already mentioned in the introduction, a succession
of compounds, mainly bahuvrīhis, enables the topicalization of the temple
(khang). Lamotte’s translation reflects this literary device, contrary to Powers
who does not topicalize the palace to the same degree on account of some
ambiguities regarding the logical subject of a few clauses describing this
palace. To illustrate this point, it seems unclear whether the adjectives
“steadfast,” “enduring,” or “free” in Powers’ translation qualify the temple
or the beings attending it. Cornu mainly follows Powers here but the
grammatical necessity to indicate the gender and number of qualifiers in
French limits the risk of confusion, which is obviously not the case in
English. Regarding the usage of tenses, Lamotte is the only translator who
uses both narrative past and present in this first paragraph. He thus
switches from the past tense to the present tense in order to describe the
characteristics of the temple, a decision I chose not to follow in the present
translation.

n.37

Lamotte, Cornu, and Powers do not translate the anaphoric pronoun de in ’jig
rten las ’das pa de’i bla ma’i dge ba’i rtsa ba las byung ba. Powers explains in a
footnote (see Power 1995, p. 313, n. 3) that this pronoun refers to gnosis
according to Wonch’uk, although his translation does not reflect this
interpretation. Since wisdom has not been mentioned earlier in the text and
since the pronoun de is anaphoric, I read de as referring to the Buddha.
Moreover, the concept of “root of virtue” is usually associated with persons
and we have a reference to dbang sgyur ba in the next qualifying phrase.

n.38

The clause dbang sgyur ba’i rnam par rig pa shin tu rnam par rig pa’i mtshan nyid
is problematic. Lamotte translates it in the following way: “très pur, il se
caractérise par une pensée maîtresse de soi.” Cornu and Powers follow the
reading found in D, folio 2.a; S, folio 4.a; Kǫ, folio 1.a; L, folio 3.a; and H, folio
3.a ( dbang sgyur ba’i rnam par rig pa shin tu rnam par rig pa’i mtshan nyid) and
render the two occurrences of rnam par rig pa by an apposition: “It was
characterized by perfect knowledge, the knowledge of one who has
mastery.” (Powers 1995, p. 5). However, in F, folio 4.b we find a variant
reading which, I believe, makes more sense: dbang byed pa’i rnam par rig pa
shin tu rnam par dag pa’i mtshan nyid. The Tibetan verbal prefix shin tu rnam par

is used to render the upasarga su- in Sanskrit, like in suviśuddha. In Mvyut
351, blo shin tu rnam par dag pa thus translates the Sanskrit suviśuddhabuddhiḥ.
n.39

nges par ’byung ba. In Skt. niḥsaraṇa or niryāṇa, which have the meaning of
setting forth, issue, exit, departure, escape, a road out of town. The analogy
here is not about emancipation or renunciation as Powers and Cornu
translated it but rather with the metaphor of the journey. In that sense, what
is meant here is the departure to reach the palace. Lamotte (1935), Keenan
(2000), and Cleary (1999) follow Xuanzang’s translation:

⼤念慧⾏以為游路

(Cbeta, Taishō 676). Interestingly enough, F does not have nges par ’byung ba
but just ’byung ba.
n.40

rin po che’i pad ma’i rgyal po chen po yon tan gyi tshogs mtha’ yas pas brgyan pa’i
bkod pa la rten pa na bzhugs te. This clause has been translated in various ways
depending on how one understands the compound rin po che’i pad ma’i rgyal
po chen po yon tan gyi tshogs mtha’ yas pas. Lamotte (1935), Powers (1995), and
Cornu (2005) read it as a dvandva: “II est orné de qualités infinies, de joyaux,
de lotus et de grands rois” (Lamotte 1935, p. 167); “this pattern was adorned
with boundless masses of excellent qualities, and with great kingly jeweled
lotuses” (Powers 1995, pp. 5–6); “paré d’infinies qualités et de grands lotus
royaux incrustés de pierreries” (Cornu 2005, p. 26). However, it seems to me
that it would be better to read this compound as a karmadhāraya. Folio 5.a
offers a variant reading that could support this interpretation: yon ten gyi
tshogs mtha’ yas pas/ brgyan pa’i rin po che chen po pad mo’i rgyal po’i bkod pa’i gnas
na nyan thos kyi dge ’dun tshad med pa dang / thabs gcig tu bzhugs te. In addition to
this problem, one should note that Lamotte’s translation of the compound rin
po che’i pad ma’i rgyal po chen po as a dvandva is inaccurate here. Powers’
reading of this term is correct.

n.41

chos in the sense of qualities as understood by Lamotte (1935), Powers (1995),
and Cleary (1999).

n.42

spyod yul; gocara. This term refers here to an object perceived by the six
senses, so its semantic field pertains to perception as opposed to meditative
practice, in which case it would be close in meaning to ālambana (“referential
object”). Translating all these terms with “object” would conflate these
various semantic fields in the context of the present text.

n.43

bsam gyis mi khyab pa rnam par ’jog pa (cf. rnam par gzhag pa bsam gyis mi khyab pa;
acintyavyavasthānaḥ, see Mvyut 359). Compare with Lamotte: “ses attributs
sont inconcevables” (Lamotte 1935, p. 168); Powers: “positing [doctrines]
inconceivably” (Powers 1995, p. 7); Cornu: “il était entré dans l’indicible”
(Cornu 2005, p. 26).

n.44

dus gsum mnyam pa nyid tshar phyin pa; tryadhvasamatāniryātaḥ (Mvyut 360). The
term niryāta means here “adept, perfected, perfectly skilled” (see Edgerton
1953, p. 303).

n.45

byang chub sems dpa’ thams cad kyis ye shes yang dag par blangs pa. See Mvyut 366:
ye shes byang chub sems dpa’ thams cad kyis yang dag par mnos pa;
sarvabodhisattvasampratīcchitajñānaḥ. One should follow here the translations
of Lamotte (1935), Keenan (2000), and Cleary (1999).

n.46

de bzhin gshegs pa ma ’dres pa’i rnam par thar par mdzad pa’i ye shes kyi mthar phyin
pa. See Mvyut 368: de bzhin gshegs pa ma ’dres pa’i rnam par thar pa’i mdzad pa’i ye
shes kyi mthar phin pa/ de bzhin gshegs pa ma ’dres pa’i rnam par thar par mdzad pa’i
ye shes kyi mthar phin pa; asaṃbhinnatathāgata-vimokṣajñānaniṣṭhāgataḥ. See also
Mvyut 5192: dbyer med pa; ma ’dres pa; ma ’dres pa’m dbyer med pa; asaṃbhedaḥ. If
we understand ma ’dres pa in the sense of dbyer med pa, or even zung ’jug
(yuganaddha), the meaning of the term is “indivisible/in unity,” conveying
the notion of nonduality of the sameness mentioned several times in this
introduction. Lamotte translates ma ’dres pa with “non diversifié,” Cornu with
“distinctement,” Powers with “uniquely,” Keenan with “unified.” I don’t
think one should understand ma ’dres pa with the meaning of kevala in the
present case since it is associated with ye shes in other contexts where the
idea of being exclusive to a particular person (e.g., buddhas) is negated (see
Keenan 1980, p. 782ff.).

n.47

mtha’ dang dpung med pa’i sangs rgyas kyis mnyam pa nyid thugs su chud pa. One
should read here instead: mtha’ dang dbus med pa’i sangs rgyas kyi sa mnyam pa
nyid bu thugs su chud pa; anantamadhyabuddhabhūmisamatādhigataḥ (see Mvyut
369).

n.48

D, folio 2.b: nam mkha’i khams kyi mthas gtugs pa, which stands in apposition to
chos kyi dbyings kyis klas pa (“the ultimate within the domain of truth”). See
Mvyut 6430: nam mkha’i dbyings kyi mtha’ gtugs pa, nam mkha’i khams kyi mthar
gtugs for the Sanskrit ākāśadhātuparyavasānaḥ. Compare with Mvyut 371: nam
mkha’i khams kyi mtha’ klas pa, nam mkha’i khams kyi mthas klas pa as Tibetan
equivalents of ākāśadhātuparyavasānaḥ. In Mvyut 431, don gyi mthar gtugs pa
and don gyi mthar thug pa are Tibetan translations of paryavasitārthaḥ.

n.49

nges par ’byung ba; niryāṇika (?). Powers (1995) and Cornu (2005) translate it as
“renunciation.”

n.50

See Mvyut 7450: nges par rtog pa/nges par rtogs pa; nirūpaṇā. Translated by
Lamotte with “pénétrante” and by Keenan with “penetrating,” while

Powers and Cornu opted respectively for “certain realization” and
“réalisation certaine.”
n.51

See Mvyut 1113: yon yongs su sbyong ba chen po; mahādakṣiṇāpariṣodhakaḥ. D, 4,5;
Kǫ, folio 2.b; and H, 7,2 omit yon. However, it is present in S, 7,2 and L,
folio 5.a: yon tan, while F.5.b reads sbyin pa.

n.52

Powers (1995) and Cornu (2005) read nges pa, but one should read here
instead the graphically very similar des pa (“gentleness”) as in Mvyut 1115
where this expression is also found extensively: bzod pa dang des pa chen po
dang ldan pa; mahākṣāntisauratyasamanvāgataḥ.

n.53

brjod du med pa dang / gnyis su med pa’i mtshan nyid. I read this compound as a
bahuvrīhi. The full clause [brjod du med pa dang / gnyis su med pa’i mtshan nyid]
+ [don dam pa] is a karmadhāraya meaning literally “the ultimate that is that
whose defining characteristic is inexpressible and absolute.” Powers’
suggestion is also possible here (“the ultimate whose defining characteristic
is inexpressible and non-dual”). Lamotte leaves out mtshan nyid. Cornu
somewhat mixes qualifiers and qualified terms in his rendering of this
clause.

n.54

yongs su ma grub pa; apariniṣpanna (?). This paragraph establishes the
opposition between the imaginary (parikalpita) and the actual (pariniṣpanna).
These two aspects are found in the teaching on the three kinds of
essencelessness: see Saṃdh. chapters 6–8.

n.55

shes pa dang mthong ba; jñānadarśana. D, folio 3.b: shes pa but F, folio 6.b; S, folio
5.a; VD, folio 44.b: ye shes. I emended the text in this way throughout the sūtra
since this expression is repeated several times.

n.56

Xuanzang’s translation reads

謂諸聖者以聖智聖⾒離名⾔故現等正覺 (Cbeta,

Taishō 676).
n.57

As noted by Tillemans (1997), Powers reads phyir in the sense of “because”

為慾令他現等

here. Keenan and Cleary’s readings of Xuanzang’s translation (

覺故, Cbeta, Taishō 676) agree with Lamotte’s and Tillemans’ understanding
of this passage.
n.58

ston pas btags pa’i tshig yin te. VD, folio 44.b: om.

n.59

rnam grangs; paryāya. The Dunhuang manuscript of the sūtra instead has
gzhung du ’du shes (n°194 folio 62.a; see Hakayama 1984, p. 187).

n.60

See 1.5.

n.61

VD, folio 45.b reads the demonstrative pronoun as a plural (i.e., de dag)
throughout this paragraph.

n.62

’di ltar don in the sense of yathārtha.

n.63

Powers’ and Cornu’s translations are inaccurate here: “Subsequently they do
not make the conventional designations: ‘This is true, the other is false.’ They
make conventional designations because they completely understand the
object in this way.” (Powers 1995, p. 17). “Comme ils connaissent
parfaitement le sens réel de ces phénomènes…” (Cornu 2005, p. 32). Lamotte
seems to have translated 1.4 on the basis of the Chinese. In addition, rjes su
should be read as rjes su tha snyad for anuvyavahāra.

n.64

Lamotte’s rather free translation of 1.5 fails to render the opposition between
what does not exist and what does according to the sūtra: ’di snyam du sems
te/ ’dus byas dang / ’dus ma byas snang ba gang yin pa ’di ni med kyi/ gang la ’dus
byas dang ’dus ma byas kyi ’du shes dang / ’dus byas dang / ’dus ma byas kyi rnam
grangs kyi [F.5.a] ’du shes ’byung ba/ rnam par rtog pa las byung ba/ ’du byed kyi
mtshan ma sgyu ma lta bu ’di ni yod/ blo rnam par rmongs par byed pa ’di ni yod do.
The first chapter gives an introduction to central concepts, such as
conditioned/unconditioned, existent/nonexistent, imaginary/actual. It
prefigures the treatment of the two truths (bden pa gnyis; satyadvaya) in
Saṃdh. chapter 3 as well as that of the three natures/essences and three
kinds of nonexistence of nature/essence (ngo bo nyid (med pa) nyid;
(niḥ)svabhāvatā) expounded in Saṃdh. (cf. chapters 6–8).

n.65

brtsams pa; ārabhya with the meaning of “referring to/having to do with,” a
frequent occurrence in Saṃdh. See Edgerton 1953, p. 102.

n.66

rtog ge thams cad las yang dag par ’das pa; sarvatarkasamatikrānta. Regarding the
translation of the term rtog ge (tarka), Powers 1995, p. 25 suggests
“argumentation,” but the emphasis in the present context is not on logical
reasoning. The term tarka denotes here any kind of assumption,
presupposition, representation, or conjecture regarding the absolute that is
the product of the intellect (manas).

n.67

The English translation of this passage should convey the paradox of the
situation. Although the ultimate is inexpressible, the Buddha gave countless
teachings. Syntactic connective particles between clauses about the
inexpressible ultimate and the domain of expression and reasoning have
therefore an adversative meaning in the present paragraph: ngas ni don dam
pa rtog ge thams cad las yang dag par ’das pa’i mtshan nyid mngon par rdzogs par
sangs rgyas te/ mngon par rdzogs par sangs rgyas nas kyang bsnyad cing gsal bar

byas/ rnam par phye/ gdags par byas/ rab tu bstan to/ de ci’i phyir zhe na. Lamotte’s
and Powers’ translation do not make this point clear.
n.68

so so(r) rang rig pa;
pratyātmavedya/pratyātmavedanīya/pratyātmajñāna/prātyatmam (see
Schmithausen 2014, p. 346), in the sense of realizing or understanding for
oneself in an intuitive way, as personal experience. Powers’ translation does
not reflect the meaning of this term: “I have explained that the ultimate is
realized individually by the Aryas, while objects collectively known by
ordinary beings [belong to] the realm of argumentation.” In the sūtra, so so(r)
rang rig pa is a synonym or a qualifier of ye shes (jñāna).

n.69

Lamotte translates rtog ge’i spyod yul by “affaire de tradition”; see Lamotte
1935, p. 173. Beyond the fact that this is wrong, it is worth noting that the
opposition here is between the intuitive and personal knowledge of the
noble beings and the intellectual and transactional knowledge of ordinary
beings, namely, between gnosis and mind. Powers 1995, p. 27 reflects the
personal aspect of so sor rang gi rig but not its intuitive quality.

n.70

mtshan ma; nimitta. Although “notion” would fit well here, one should keep
in mind that nimitta as a polysemic term denotes phenomenal appearance
throughout the sūtra. However, it is clear that “phenomenal appearance”
and “notion” are two terms that are joined at the hip from the perspective of
the doctrine expounded in Saṃdh.

n.71

In 2.2, the Buddha mentions a paradox. He gives explanations about the
ultimate in speculative terms, although the ultimate is inexpressible. This
paradox is best rendered in English or French by reading the particle la in
the statements in question as having an adversative meaning. For example:
chos ’phags gzhan yang don dam pa ni tha snyad thams cad yang dag par chad pa yin
par ngas bshad la/ rtog ge ni tha snyad kyi spyod yul yin te.

n.72

The Turfan Sanskrit fragment found by Matsuda reads paramārtha[dhar]mā
vigatābhilāpaḥ at the end of chapter 2’s closing gāthā (cf. Sanskrit text in
Matsuda 2013: p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.41). In D, folio 6.b and F, folio 10.b, we
have instead the Tibetan term rtsod dang bral ba. It is possible that brjod med in
line 2 and rtsod dang bral ba were inverted metri causae.

n.73

Powers reads don dam pa and mtshan nyid as being in apposition in the
sentence de [i.e., don dam pa] ni rtog ge kun las ’das mtshan nyid. Lamotte reads
rtog ge kun las ’das mtshan nyid (sarvatarkasamatikrāntalakṣaṇa) as a bahuvrīhi,
which is much better. See Powers 1995, p. 31 and Lamotte 1935, p. 174.

I am using the adjective “indistinct” here in the sense of the first definition
n.74

given in the Oxford English Dictionary: “1. Not distinct or distinguished from
each other, or from something else; not kept separate or apart in the mind or
perception; not clearly defined or marked off.” Oxford English Dictionary
Online, s.v. “indistinct,” accessed July 20, 2020, https://www-oedcom.ezproxy.leidenuniv.nl:2443/view/Entry/94602?
redirectedFrom=indistinct# eid.

n.75

mos pa; praṇidhāna. See mos pa spyod pa’i sa. See Mvyut 897: mos pa spyod pa’i sa;
adhimukticaryābhūmiḥ.

n.76

Schmithausen reads don dam pa’i mtshan nyid (paramārthalakṣaṇa) as “the
defining characteristic that is the ultimate” in 3.5 (see Schmithausen 2014, p.
558, §512.3). However, Saṃdh. chapter 3 is about conditioned phenomena in
relation to the ultimate when their respective defining characteristics are
examined. The question here is not to determine whether the ultimate is the
defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena. Rather, it is to determine
whether the conditioned and the ultimate are different by examining their
defining characteristics. Therefore, I read don dam pa’i mtshan nyid as “the
defining characteristic of the ultimate,” namely, as a genitive tatpuruṣa and
not as a karmadhāraya.

n.77

To render sha stag.

n.78

I did not translate the phrase so so’i skye bo kho nar gyur bzhin du in an
adversative mode (e.g., “though merely ordinary”) because the same phrase
is found in the next paragraph in a parallel construction where the syntax in
relation to the meaning cannot be interpreted to express contrast. Here bzhin
du stands for yathā in the sense of “as” (i.e., “en tant que” in French).

n.79

grub pa dang bde ba; yogakṣema (see Edgerton 1953, p. 448a,b). Refer to
Tillemans 1997, p. 157ff. for a discussion of Powers’ rendering of the term in
his translation of Saṃdh. (Powers 1995). Lamotte translates this term with
“de sécurité suprême.” See Lamotte 1935, p. 175.

n.80

I linked the two clauses with “and” because these two clauses are part of the
logical argument on being “not different.” We have here a relativecorrelative syntactic structure: gang gi phyir … de’i phyir (i.e., yasmāt … tasmāt).
The first two clauses linked by “and” represent the hetu (“premise” or
“reason”) posited by yasmāt. The logical structure of the paragraph is “since
(a), (b), and (c), therefore (d)” (the conclusion that is stated in the very next
sentence “For this reason…”): “Suviśuddhamati, ordinary beings (a) do not
realize the truth and, as mere ordinary beings, (b) neither do they attain

nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, (c) nor do they fully and completely
awaken to the unsurpassable complete and perfect awakening. For these
reasons (de’i phyir, referring to (a), (b), and (c)), it is not correct to say that the
defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate are indistinct.” D, folio 7.b: blo gros shin tu rnam
dag gang gi phyir so so’i skye bo bden pa mthong ba ma yin/ so so’i skye bo kho nar
gyur bzhin du grub pa dang / bde ba bla na med pa’i mya ngan las ’das pa ’thob par
yang mi ’gyur/ bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub mngon par rdzogs
par ’tshang rgya bar mi ’gyur ba de’i phyir ’du byed kyi mtshan nyid dang / don dam
pa’i mtshan nyid tha dad pa ma yin zhes bya bar mi rung ste.
n.81

This entire paragraph is problematic in D: blo gros shin tu rnam dag gang gi
phyir bden pa mthong ba rnams ’du byed kyi mtshan ma dang bral ba ma yin gyi/ bral
ba kho na yin pa dang / bden pa mthong ba mtshan ma’i ’ching ba las rnam par grol ba
ma yin gyi/ rnam par grol ba yin pa dang / bden pa mthong ba gnas ngan len gyi
’ching ba las rnam par grol ba ma yin gyi/ rnam par grol ba dang / ’ching ba de gnyi
ga las rnam par grol na grub pa dang / bde pa bla na [F.8.a] med pa’i phyir mya ngan
las ’das pa ’thob par ’gyur ba dang / bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang
chub mngon par rdzogs par ’tshang rgya bar yang ’gyur ba. However, Lamotte,
Keenan, and Cleary translate the phrases in bold with a double negation. If
we look at the same paragraph in F, folio 10.a, we find an interesting textual
variant in which the expected double negation is found: ma bral ba’ang ma yin

由此道理當
知⼀切⾮如理⾏ 不如正理善清淨慧。由於今時⾮⾒諦者。於諸⾏相不能除遣。然
能除遣⾮⾒諦者。Cbeta, Taishō 676). Powers chose to translate this passage
te and ma grol ba’ang ma yin te, just like in Xuanzang’s translation (

without proceeding to any emendation, which makes little sense from the
perspective of the argument expounded in this section of the text: “Suviśuddhamati, it is not the case that seers of truth are free from the signs of
the compounded; they are simply free. Moreover, seers of truth are not
liberated from the bondage of signs, but they are liberated. Seers of truth are
not liberated from the bondage of errant tendencies, but they are liberated.”
(Powers 1995, p. 41).
n.82

We have here again a complex relative-correlative syntactic structure: gang gi
phyir … de’i phyir (i.e., yasmāt … tasmāt). All the clauses between gang gi phyir
and de’i phyir represent the hetu (“premise” or “reason”) posited by yasmāt.
The logical structure of the paragraph is “since (a), (b), (c), (d), therefore (e)”
(the conclusion that is stated in the very next sentence, “For all these
reasons,…”): “Suviśuddhamati, it is not the case that (a) those who realize
the truth are not detached from the phenomenal appearance of conditioned
phenomena, for they are indeed detached from it. (b) Neither are they not
liberated from the bondage of phenomenal appearance, for they are indeed

liberated from it. (c) Nor are they not liberated from the bondage of
corruption, for they are indeed liberated from it. (d) Since they are liberated
from these two kinds of bondage, [F.8.a] not only do they attain nirvāṇa, the
unsurpassable good, but they will also fully and completely awaken to the
unsurpassable complete and perfect awakening. (e) For all these reasons
(de’i phyir referring to (a), (b), (c), and (d)), it is not correct to say that the
defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate are distinct.” D, folios 7.b–8.a: blo gros shin tu
rnam dag gang gi phyir bden pa mthong ba rnams ’du byed kyi mtshan ma dang bral
ba ma yin gyi/ bral ba kho na yin pa dang / bden pa mthong ba mtshan ma’i ’ching ba
las rnam par grol ba ma yin gyi/ rnam par grol ba yin pa dang / bden pa mthong ba
gnas ngan len gyi ’ching ba las rnam par grol ba ma yin gyi/ rnam par grol ba dang /
’ching ba de gnyi ga las rnam par grol na grub pa dang / bde ba bla na med pa’i phyir
mya ngan las ’das pa ’thob par ’gyur ba dang / bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i
byang chub mngon par rdzogs par ’tshang rgya bar yang ’gyur ba de’i phyir ’du byed
kyi mtshan nyid dang / don dam pa’i mtshan nyid tha dad pa zhes byar mi rung ste.
n.83

On a similar line of thought, see 4.10.
gdags pa; prajñapti. Lamotte translates this term with “dire.” This does not

n.84

convey the meaning of gdags pa, which implies the idea of imputation,
intimation, conceptualization, or representation. Here, in the sense of
“decide,” see Edgerton 1953, p. 359,1.

n.85

mi bzod; na kṣamate, na kṣamati (see Edgerton 1953, p. 199,1). Pāli: khamati (see
The Pali–English Dictionary (Rhys-Davids 1921), p. 234).

n.86

D: blo gros shin tu rnam dag ngas ni de ltar don dam pa phra ba mchog tu phrag
mchog tu zab pa/ rtogs par dka’ ba/ mchog tu dka’ ba/ tha dad pa dang / tha dad pa ma
yin pa nyid las yang dag par ’das pa’i mtshan nyid mngon par rdzogs par sangs rgyas
te. I read tha dad pa ma yin pa nyid las yang dag par ’das pa’i mtshan nyid as a
bahuvrīhi, not a tatpuruṣa. The terms don dam pa and tshan nyid are not in
apposition in chapter 3, since the two terms are repeatedly connected
through a genitive particle: don dam pa’i mtshan nyid (which occurs 32 times in
folios 5.a, 5.b, 6.b, 7.a, 7.b, 8.a, 8.b, and 9.a). I also understand similar
constructions with don dam pa and tshan nyid in the following chapter as
bahuvrīhis.

n.87

This phrase is also found in 2.2, 3.6, and 4.7 (see also folios 5.b, 9.a–b, and
10.b–11.a): mngon par rdzogs par sangs rgyas nas kyang bsnyad cing gsal bar byas/
rnam par phye/ gdags pa byas/ rab tu bstan to.

n.88

Powers translates mtshan nyid as singular (see Powers 1995, p. 49). But the
question of the identity or difference in this chapter is evaluated from the
perspective of two defining characteristics, namely, the defining
characteristic of the conditioned and the defining characteristic of the
unconditioned.
The last two lines are quoted in the Bhāvanākrama; see Tucci 1971, p. 1:

n.89

nimittabandhanāj jantur atho dauṣṭhulabandhanāt/ vipaśyanāṃ bhāvayitvā śamathañ
ca vimucyata iti.

n.90

Lit. “in the world of beings.”

n.91

F reads here shes pa in agreement with D. See F, folio 14.bff.

n.92

dmigs pa; ālambana. I think it is important here to read dmigs pa as meaning
“object” because in folio 11.a the Buddha contrasts these various objects
(aggregates, sense sources, constituents, truths, etc.) with the “object
conducive to purification” (rnam par dag pa’i dmigs pa, *viśuddhyālambana; see
Schmithausen 2014, p. 362, §306.5 and n. 1644). Translating dmigs pa here as
“observing” would weaken the central opposition between (a) the objects
taken as a reference point for their practice by those who have not realized
the defining characteristic of the ultimate and (b) the object conducive to
purification, which is present within all phenomena. The purpose of this
chapter is to introduce this fundamental point.

n.93

This paragraph deals with the thirty-seven branches of awakening (byang
chub kyi yan lag; bodhyaṅgāni).

n.94

ro gcig pa; ekarasa. I read the compound thams cad du ro gcig pa’i mtshan nyid;
*sarvatraikarasalakṣaṇa (?) as a bahuvrīhi; see D, folio 12.a: rab ’byor de bzhin du
don dam pa yang mtshan nyid tha dad pa’i chos rnams la thams cad du ro gcig pa’i
mtshan nyid yin par blta bar bya’o. I understand thams cad du ro gcig pa’i mtshan
nyid to refer here to the defining characteristic of the ultimate since this
definition presents dharma as having various lakṣaṇa. As a consequence, I
read this sentence as stating that the ultimate is that whose defining
characteristic is always of a single nature in all phenomena that have diverse
defining characteristics. See also 4.8, which supports this interpretation.

n.95

rnam par dag pa’i dmigs pa; *viśuddhyālambana. Lamotte reads here rnam par dag
pa’i dmigs pa with the meaning of viśuddhālambana (“objet pur”), but
Schmithausen gives *viśuddhyālambana as the Sanskrit equivalent for the
Tibetan (see Schmithausen 2014, p. 362, §306.5 and n. 1644). It is worth noting
that this term is also found in chapter 7, where it is again equated with the

ultimate (don dam pa). In this context, it is said that paratantra is not an object
conducive to purification whereas the actual (pariniṣpanna) is. In this sense,
one should make the distinction here between vastu and ālambana. The
ultimate is conceived here as the referential object, or support object, of a
purification that leads to awakening. The usage of ālambana in reference to
the ultimate clearly refers to practice in the present chapter.
n.96

Compare D, folio 11.a: rab ’byor rnam grangs des na khyod kyis ’di ltar thams cad du
ro gcig pa’i mtshan nyid gang yin pa de ni don dam pa yin par rig par bya’o with D,
folio 12.a: rab ’byor de bzhin du don dam pa yang mtshan nyid tha dad pa’i chos
rnams la thams cad du ro gcig pa’i mtshan nyid yin par blta bar bya’o (passim).

n.97

de bzhin nyid; tathatā. I translate tathatā with “true reality” (in the sense of the
true state or nature of things) instead of the more usual “suchness” or
“thusness.” However, when de bzhin nyid is qualified by an adjective such as
don dam pa, I simply translate it with “reality” to improve readability. See
Schmithausen 2014, p. 356, §303.1 (passim), in which tathatā is translated with
“True Reality” or “Suchness.”

n.98

D reads gnyis med pa’i shes pa, while F, folio 16.b reads gnyis su med pa’i ye shes.
kho na; eva. For a comparison between Buescher’s and Schmithausen’s

n.99

translations of this sentence, see Schmithausen 2014, p. 380, §324.

n.100

D: de bzhin gshegs pa rnams byung yang rung ma byung yang rung ste/ rtag pa rtag
pa’i dus dang / ther zug ther zug gi dus su chos gnas par bya ba’i phyir chos rnams kyi
chos nyid dbyings de ni rnam par gnas pa kho na yin pa. Lamotte translates chos
gnas par bya ba’i phyir with “pour le maintien des choses,” but phyir does not
have a dative function here. Powers’ translation reads, “because phenomena
abide in permanent, permanent time and in everlasting, everlasting time, the
domain of reality of phenomena alone abides.” This does not make sense
either. Conditioned phenomena are impermanent as explained at length in
the first four chapters. The argument simply runs as follows: since it is
present in all things, this alone is permanent. As for the expression chos nyid
dbyings, D, folio 11.b reads chos rnams kyi chos nyid dbyings while F, folio 17.a
has chos rnams kyi chos nyid/ chos gnas pa’i dbyings, referring respectively to
dharmatā and dharmadhātu (compare with Mvyut 1719: chos gnas pa nyid;
dharmasthititā). I am reluctant to translate dbyings (dhātu) as “realm/domain”
here because the meaning of dhātu as “constituent” makes so much sense,
particularly when reading F, in which dbyings is glossed as chos gnas pa, “that
which abides within phenomena,” “that which is the support/source of
phenomena,” or “the condition of phenomena.” Xuanzang’s translation

confirms the suggested translation:

唯有常常時恒恒時如來出世若不出世諸法

法性安⽴法界安住 (Cbeta, Taishō 676).
n.101

ji tsam gyis; kiyant. The complete sentence reads, “In what sense are they
skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition?”

n.102

D: blo gros yangs ba ’gro ba drug gi ’khor ba ’di na sems can gang dang gang dag sems
can gyi ris gang dang gang du yang sgo nga nas skye ba’i skye gnas sam/ yang na
mngal nas skye ba’am/ yang na drod gsher las skye ba’am/ yang na rdzus te skye ba’i
skye gnas su lus mngon par ’grub cing ’byung bar ’gyur ba der. “For whatever
sentient beings an individual existence (ātmabhāva) comes about and
emerges in this saṃsāra comprising six destinations, in whatever
community of beings, be it in [the mode of] egg-born, womb-born, moistureborn or spontaneous generation, there…” (Schmithausen 2014, p. 177, §149).
Regarding lus mngon par ’grub cing ’byung bar ’gyur ba, one finds the Sanskrit
equivalent ātmabhāvam abhinirvartayati for lus mngon par ’grub ’gyur ba (see
Yokoyama, Kōitsu, and Hirosawa Takayuki, eds., Index to the Yogācārabhūmi
(Chinese-Sanskrit-Tibetan) (Tokyo: Sankibō Busshorin, 1996)). Schmithausen
reads here, “For whatever sentient beings an individual existence
(ātmabhāva) comes about and emerges” (Schmithausen 2014, p. 177, §149), but
it seems to me that we could have had here a causative (ātmabhāvam
abhinirvartayanti) with the Literal meaning of producing or bringing about a
[new] existence, in a word, being reborn (for an instance of this rendering,
see ibid., p. 191, n. 812). Otherwise, one would expect a syntactic particle in
Tibetan after sems can gang dang gang dag to match Schmithausen’s reading,
“For whatever sentient beings,” particularly if one understands ’gro ba drug
gi ’khor ba ’di na sems can gang dang gang dag as not in apposition to sems can gyi
ris gang dang gang du, which I think is the correct way to understand the
expression.

n.103

I follow here the second possible interpretation of the correlative-relative
syntactic structure of the sentence as suggested by Schmithausen (see
Schmithausen 2014, p. 178, §150), in which der (tatra) is read as having a
temporal connotation, rendered by the adverb “then.”

n.104

D: sa bon thams cad pa’i sems rnam par smin cing ’jug la rgyas shing ’phel ba dang
yangs par ’gyur ro. See Schmithausen 1987, p. 356, n. 508; and 2014, p. 325,
n. 1490 for the Sanskrit reconstruction: *( sarvabījakaṃ cittaṃ) vipacyate
saṃmūrcchati vṛddhiṃ virūdhiṃ vipulatām apadyate. See also Waldron 2003, p.
218, n. 13. Lamotte (1973, p. 65ff.) suggests kalalatvena saṃmūrcchati in his
translation of the Mahāyānasaṃgraha I,34. The appended commentary
describes how the appropriating cognition enters the mother’s womb by

uniting with the semen and the blood (śukraśoṇita). The embryo with which,
from then on, the appropriating cognition shares a common destiny
(ekayogakṣema) is the result of this “coagulation.” On the topic, see Kritzer
2000.
n.105

See Waldron 2003, pp. 94–95 for a translation of 5.2. See also Brunnhölzl 2018,
p. 1305ff. regarding Asaṅga’s and Wonch’uk’s commentaries on Saṃdh. 5.2–
7.

n.106

kun tu bsags pa; ācita. This explanation corresponds to an etymological
analysis of the Sanskrit term citta. Xuanzang’s translation reads:

味觸等積集滋⻑故 (Cbeta, Taishō 676).
n.107

由此識⾊聲香

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 157ff. for an extensive discussion of the various
testimonies and interpretations of this sentence. See also Waldron 2003, pp.
95–96 for a translation of 5.3, and Tillemans 1997, pp. 157–58 for a discussion
of Powers’ translation of 5.3. Powers translates the verb in last sentence with
an active form “because it collects and accumulates forms, sounds…”
(Powers 1995, p. 71). It seems to me that, since this is an etymological
explanation of citta, a passive is better in the present case.

n.108

rnam par shes pa’i tshogs drug po, lit. “the sixfold group of cognitions.”

n.109

Waldron’s translation (Waldron 2003, p. 97) seems to follow the Sanskrit and
Tibetan found in Sthiramati’s Triṃśikāvijñaptibhāṣyam (see TrBh, 33.25–34.4 in
Buescher 2007). However, the quote of Saṃdh. in this treatise is drawn from
5.5. It does not quite match the last sentence of 5.4. See D: gal te rnam par shes
pa’i tshogs gnyis sam/ gsum mam bzhi lhan cig gam/ lnga car lhan cig ’byung na yang
der rnam par shes pa’i tshogs lnga po dag dang / spyod yul mtshungs pa rnam par rtog
pa’i yid kyi rnam par shes pa yang gcig kho na lhan cig ’byung ngo. Compare with
TrBh, 33.26–27 (Buescher 2007): gal te rnam par shes pa gnyis sam gsum mam lnga
’byung ba’i rkyen nye bar gnas par gyur na yang gnyis sam gsum mam lnga’ bar du
’byung bar ’gyur ro. Sanskrit: saced dvayos trayānāṃ sacet pañcānāṃ vijñānām
utpattipratyayaḥ pratyupasthito bhavati sakṛd yāvat pañcānāṃ pravṛttir bhavati.

n.110

For a comparison with the Dunhuang edition of 5.5, as well as for a general
evaluation of the relevance of this edition, see Schmithausen 2014, p. 419,
n. 1852.

n.111

D: gal te rlabs gnyis sam gal te rab tu mang po dag ’byung ba’i rkyen nye bar gnas par
gyur na rlabs rab tu mang po dag ’byung but VD, folio 54.a: gal te rlabs gnyis sam gal
te rab tu mang po dag ’byung ba’i rkyen nye bar gnas par gyur na rlabs kyang gnyis

sam rab tu mang po dag ’byung. S, folio 19.a is in agreement with D here (gnyis
sam is omitted).
n.112

On the metaphor of the mirror in Buddhist texts, see Wayman 1974.

n.113

D: gal te gzugs brnyan gnyis sam gal te rab tu mang po dag ’byung ba’i rkyen nye bar
gnas par gyur na gzugs brnyan rab tu mang po dag ’byung but VD, folio 54.a: gal te
gzugs brnyan gnyis sam gal te gzugs brnyan rab tu mang po dag ’byung ba’i rkyen
nye bar gnas pa gyur na gzugs brnyan yang gnyis sam rab tu mang po dag ’byung.
Lamotte 1935, p. 186 translates yongs su sbyor bar yang mi mngon with “ne

n.114

souffre aucun dommage.”

n.115

shes pa, although it is worth noting that the Dunhuang manuscript reads ye
shes. See Hakayama 1986, 11 E6 (3).

n.116

D: blo gros yangs pa gang gi phyir byang chub sems dpa’ rang gi so so nang gi len pa
mi mthong / len pa’i rnam par shes pa yang mi mthong la/ de yang dag pa ji lta ba
bzhin du yin pa. I am following here Schmithausen’s reading of gang gi phyir
(yataḥ) in the sense of “as soon as” (see Schmithausen 2014, p. 346–47,
n. 1577). This interpretation is confirmed by F, folio 19.b, which reads nam
instead of gang gi phyir.

n.117

nang gi so sor rang rig pa; adhyātmaṃ prātyatmam (see Schmithausen 2014,
p. 346–47, n. 1577). See F, folio 19.b: nang gi so so rang.

n.118

“Neither the accumulated nor the mind” is a pun on ācita and citta.

n.119

Sanskrit verses are found in Buescher 2007, see TrBh, 34.2–3. Also translated
into English in Waldron 2003, p. 101.

n.120

yongs su grub pa’i mtshan nyid; pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa. I read these compounds as
karmadhārayas, not as genitive tatpuruṣas. For an analysis of these
compounds, see Schmithausen 2014, p. 359, n. 1626.

n.121

rnam par bzhag pa; vyavasthā, which has the connotation of something being
agreed upon, represented, arranged, settled, decreed, or established.

n.122

Frauwallner and Lamotte do not translate ji tsam du (see Frauwallner 1969,
p. 285: “um sie im täglichen Sprachgebrauch zu bezeichnen” and Lamotte
1935, p. 188: “permettant de les mentionner dans le langage courant”). The
Chinese term

乃⾄ in Xuanzang’s translation (乃⾄為令隨起⾔說, Cbeta,

Taishō 676) corresponds to the Tibetan ji tsam du (for yāvat or kiyat), which I
understand here in the sense of “at least, only, even just.” Interestingly
enough, the Go witness has ci tsam gis (see Go, folio 12.a); F, folio 20.a reads

gang ji skad du, and He, folio 77.a returns gang ji snyed du (while rjes su is
omitted) for ji tsam du in D.
n.123

The Tibetan rjes su tha snyad gdags pa and the Chinese

隨起⾔說 correspond to

anuvyavahāra.
n.124

D: ji tsam du rjes su tha snyad gdags pa’i phyir chos rnams kyi ngo bo nyid dam bye
brag tu ming dang brdar rnam par gzhag pa gang yin pa’o. Frauwallner’s
translation of this passage is slightly ambiguous and could be potentially
misleading on account of the German preposition “nach”: “Es ist jede
Festsetzung eines Namens und einer Vereinbarung für die Gegebenheiten
nach Wesen oder Besonderheit, um sie im täglichen Sprachgebrauch zu
bezeichnen.” (Frauwallner 1969, p. 286). If one reads this sentence as “a
determination in terms of being and specific defining characteristic,” then
the translation is correct. However, if one reads it as meaning “the
determination of … in accordance with/corresponding to [their] being or
specific defining characteristic,” then the translation becomes problematic
since the point made in the text is precisely that there is no such thing. The
determination (Festsetzung) of a name and convention for phenomena (für
die Gegebenheiten) is not made according to the essence or defining
characteristic of phenomena (nach Wesen oder Besonderheit). Hence the
term “imaginary defining characteristic.” If this determination occurred
according to the essence of phenomena, it would be illogical to call this
defining characteristic “imaginary.” Lamotte’s translation is therefore more
accurate in the present case, although his rendering of rnam par bzhags pa
(vyavasthāna) as a present participle qualifying ming dang brda slightly
modifies the original meaning of the sentence. Sanskrit compounds with
vyavasthāna can be read as instrumental tatpuruṣa, for example
saṃjñākaraṇavyavasthāna, mātrāvyavasthāna, or aṅgavyavasthāna. Xuanzang
translates this passage as

云何諸法遍計所執相。謂⼀切法名假安⽴⾃性差別。

乃⾄為令隨起⾔說。 (Taishō 676), in which nāmasaṃketa (“names and common
references”) seem at first glance to be the grammatical passive subject of the

安⽴) or an adverb. In fact, F, folio 20.a and He, folio

main verb of the clause (

77.a read ming dang brdas rnam par bzhag pa instead of ming dang brdar rnam par
bzhag pa in D and other witnesses mentioned in the preceding notes. The
terminative of the Tibetan ming dang brdar could be read adverbially in the
sense of “nominally and conventionally” in the sense of “by means of/in
terms of names and common references” for nāmasaṃketa.
n.125

Regarding the choice of terminology for pariniṣpanna, Edgerton mentions
two possible meanings (see Edgerton 1953, p. 325): (1) “completely
perfected” in the sense of “accomplished/attained,” which corresponds to

the second clause in the present definition (6.6) in which the yong su grub pa
is glossed in the sense of yang dag par ’grub pa (D) and yang dag par bsgrub pa
(F). (2) The second meaning of pariniṣpanna according to Edgerton is
“absolute.” The term is also translated into English as meaning “real.”
Understanding pariniṣpanna as “established” or “perfected” is indeed
problematic. Reality in the sense of tathatā cannot be referred to as
“perfected,” because it is not perfectible. If it were, it would be conditioned
(see Saṃdh. chapter 3). Likewise, tathatā cannot be termed “established”
because if it were, it would be impermanent, but it is said to be the only
permanent reality (see Saṃdh. chapter 4). As a consequence, it appears
clearly from the context of the definition given above and Edgerton’s
explanations that pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa refers to both the “character
accomplished [by bodhisattvas]” in the sense of the accomplishment of the
defining characteristic of the ultimate as the ultimate attainment of the
bodhisattva’s spiritual path, and the “absolute or real character” in the sense
of reality itself (tathatā). As emphasized throughout Saṃdh., pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa is indeed none other than the defining characteristic of the ultimate
(don dam pa’i mtshan nyid; paramārthalakṣaṇa), the object conducive to
purification, (rnam par dag pa’i dmigs pa; *viśuddhyālambana). In the present
translation, I opt for “actual,” a term that fits well with the metaphors found
in Saṃdh. chapter 6, to explain the three natures (Lamotte chose “absolu,”
and Frauwallner “vollkommen”). The term “actual” obviously induces a
clear dichotomy between what is imaginary and what is real, which was
most probably at the origin of these terminological choices in the source
language. On the opposition between the imaginary and the actual by
equating the imaginary with the unreal through the usage of the same
terminology (i.e., pariniṣpanna and parikalpa/parikalpita), see 1.2.
n.126

The syntax of this sentence differs according to the various available
editions of the text with little bearing on the meaning of the sentence. For
example, compare D; VD, folios 55.a–b: chos rnams kyi de bzhin nyid gang yin pa
ste/ byang chub sems dpa’ rnams kyis rtun pa’i rgyu dang / legs par tshul bzhin yid la
byas pa’i rgyus de rtogs shing de rtogs pa goms par byas pa yang dag par grub pas
kyang bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub kyi bar du yang dag par
’grub pa gang yin pa’o; F, folio 20.a–b: gang chos rnams kyi de bzhin nyid de/ byang
chub sems dpa’ rnams kyis brtson ba’i rgyu dang / yang dag par tshul bzhin yid la
byed pa’i rgyud gang rtogs par ’gyur ba yin te rtogs dang / bsgoms pa bsgrubs pas/ bla
na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub kyi bar du yang dag par bsgrub pa’o;
and S, folio 20.b: gang chos rnams kyi de bzhin nyid/ gang byang chub sems dpa’
rnams kyis brtson ba’i rgyu dang / yang dag par tshul bzhin yid la byed pa’i rgyus
rtogs par ’gyur ba yin te/ de rtogs pa goms par byas pa yang dag par grub pas kyang /

bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub kyi bar du yang dag par ’grub pa’o.
Frauwallner reads this passage in the following way: “Es ist die Soheit der
Gegebenheiten, ihr Erschauen durch die Bodhisattva auf Grund ihrer
Energie und richtigen Beobachtung (yoniśomanasikāraḥ), und durch das
Zustandekommen der Übung dieses Erschauens schließlich das
Zustandekommen der hochsten vollkommenen Erleuchtung.” (Frauwallner
1969, p. 286). Lamotte 1935, p. 189 is similar to Frauwallner’s reading. It is
plausible that Frauwallner simply followed Lamotte’s translation of this
passage. Schmithausen suggests that the relative clause starting with gang
byang chub specifies the tathatā, which I agree with, although reading the two
clauses defining pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa as being in apposition would not negate
the fact that the second one merely specifies the first one (tathatā) as being
that which is attained by bodhisattvas: “(Suchness) into which the
bodhisattvas, in consequence of their zeal and in consequence of their
appropriate contemplation, obtain direct insight (*prativedha, cf. SaṃdhDH: so
sor chud pa), and, through the accomplishment of the repeated practice of this
insight, finally attain the Highest Perfect Awakening.” (Schmithausen 2014,
p. 540, n. 2241). It is important here to note that rtogs shing de rtogs pa goms par
byas pa stands on the same level in relation to yang dag par grub pas, which is
not apparent in Schmithausen’s translation. Thus, “obtain direct insight” (de
rtogs shing) is part of a larger argument: rtogs shing de rtogs pa goms par byas pa
(D) or rtogs par ’gyur ba yin te rtogs dang / bsgoms pa bsgrubs pas (F). This
meaning unit should therefore not be put on the same level as yang dag par
’grub pa gang yin pa’o as it is in Schmithausen’s translation, since it is one of
the reasons why there is an accomplishment according to the available
testimonies. Regarding the translation of bar du (yāvat), I followed
Schmithausen’s way of solving the problem. Powers understands it in its
usual sense of “up to,” but it does not work here, since this would imply that
what are accomplished are also inferior realizations, which Powers refers to
between square brackets as “stages”; see Powers 1995, p. 83. Schmithausen’s
reading of the second clause as specifying tathatā seems preferable.
n.127

de lta bur ni; evam eva.

n.128

Lamotte translates this term with “essentiellement fantaisiste”; see Lamotte
1935, p. 190. This is missing the point that this actually refers to the
imaginary defining characteristic.

n.129

D; VD, folio 56.a: gzhan gyi dbang gi mtshan nyid de/ kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid
der rtag pa rtag pa’i dus dang / ther zug ther zug gi dus su yongs su ma grub cing ngo
bo nyid med pa nyid kyis yongs su grub pa’i mtshan nyid blta bar bya’o. F, folio 21.b:
gzhan gyi dbang de nyid la/ kun brtag brtags pa’i mtshan nyid de rtag pa rtag pa’i dus

dang / ’khor bar ’khor ba’i dus su ma grub cing rang bzhin med pa nyid ni/ yongs su
grub pa’i mtshan nyid du blta’o; S, folio 21.b: gzhan gyi dbang de nyid kun brtags
pa’i mtshan nyid der rtag pa rtag pa’i dus dang / ther zug ther zug gi dus su yongs su
ma grub cing rang bzhin med pa nyid ni/ yongs su grub pa’i mtshan nyid du blta’o. F
and S are helpful here to interpret the syntax of D. The following simple
emendation would improve the syntax of D: gzhan gyi dbang gi mtshan nyid de
la/ kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid der rtag pa rtag pa’i dus dang / ther zug ther zug gi
dus su yongs su ma grub cing ngo bo nyid med pa nyid kyis yongs su grub pa’i
mtshan nyid blta bar bya’o. Lamotte’s translation of 6.9 is more intelligible than
that of Frauwallner. who is more Literal and strictly follows the syntax found

即依他起相上由遍計所執相於常常時於恆恆
時無有真實無⾃性性圓成實性當知亦爾 (Cbeta, Taishō 676). In my translation I
in D. Xuanzang’s translation reads:

chose to topicalize yongs su grub pa’i mtshan nyid (in agreement with D)
because the purpose of this dialogue is to define the three defining
characters.
n.130

rab tu shes; prajānāti with the meaning of pratijānāti; see Edgerton 1953, p. 357.
Lamotte translates this term with “repose,” which does not convey the
meaning of prajānāti; see Lamotte 1935, p. 190. In the following paragraph,
Lamotte uses the verb “connaître” for the same term.

n.131

mtshan ma dang ’brel pa’i ming la brten nas. VD, folio 56.a: ming dang ’brel ba’i
mtshan ma la brten nas.

n.132

mngon par zhen pa; abhiniveśa. Usually with a negative connotation; see
Edgerton 1953, p. 53. Powers reads it as meaning “strongly adhering”; see
Powers 1995, p. 87.

n.133

See the definition of the imaginary defining characteristic in 6.4: “Guṇākara,
what is the imaginary defining characteristic? It is what is nominally and
conventionally posited as the essence or the distinctive [characteristic] of
phenomena, even just in order to designate [them].” See also 7.4: “Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena as a
defining characteristic? It is the imaginary defining characteristic. Why?
Because as much as this defining characteristic is nominally and
conventionally posited, it is not posited on the basis of an essence or a
distinctive [characteristic]. This is why it is called ‘the essencelessness of all
phenomena [that is] a defining characteristic.’ ”

n.134

See 6.5: “Guṇākara, what is the other-dependent defining characteristic? It is
the dependent arising of phenomena. It is like this: ‘When this is, that arises;
because this arises, that arises;’ and also: from ‘[in dependence upon
ignorance as a condition,] conditioning mental factors [arise]’ up to ‘thus, the

whole great mass of suffering comes to be.’ ” And also 7.5: “Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena [that is] arising? It
is the other-dependent defining characteristic of phenomena. Why? Because
this is [the defining characteristic] arising on account of causes other [than
itself], and not by itself. This is why it is referred to as ‘essencelessness with
regard to arising.’ ”
n.135

I read mtshan nyid med pa dang / kun nas nyon mongs pa’i mtshan nyid dang / rnam
par byang ba’i mtshan nyid (D) as in the previous clauses, namely, as
bahuvrīhis.

n.136

Lamotte 1935: 191: “Ils excitent la pitié.” A la rigueur, one could have accepted
“ils suscitent la pitié”!

n.137

This enumeration follows the structure found in 4.2.

n.138

D: thams cad ngo bo nyid ma mchis pa for chos thams cad ngo bo nyid ma mchis pa
(D, folio 16.b passim).

n.139

For a list of texts including this sentence, see Lamotte 1935, p. 198.

n.140

rnam par gnas pa; vyavasthita (Chinese:

n.141

See Lamotte’s and Frauwallner’s translations of this passage (Lamotte 1935,

安⽴).

p. 194 and Frauwallner 1969, p. 291). Both read rnam par gnas pa (“établi,”
“beruht”) as the main verb in both clauses, which is syntactically dubious.

善男⼦云何諸法無⾃性性謂諸法遍計
所執相。何以故。此由假名安⽴為相⾮由⾃性安⽴為相 (Cbeta, Taishō 676). The
Xuanzang’s translation concords with D:

complete definition of parikalpitalakṣaṇa in 6.4: D should be kept in mind when
translating the definition of the lakṣaṇaniḥsvabhāvatā: yon tan ’byung gnas de la
chos rnams kyi kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid gang zhe na/ ji tsam du rjes su tha snyad
gdags pa’i phyir chos rnams kyi ngo bo nyid dam bye brag tu ming dang brdar rnam
par gzhag pa gang yin pa’o.
n.142

rab tu phye ba; prabhāvita (see Schmithausen 2014, p. 400, n. 1770).

n.143

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 559. Schmithausen reads paramārthaniḥsvabhāvatā
as “lack of own-being [that is] the ultimate reality.”

n.144

For a discussion of the syntactic construction gcig … gcig, refer to Tillemans
1997, pp. 161–64.

n.145

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 560 on the textual material pertaining to this
sentence.

n.146

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 561ff.

n.147

For a complete comparison of this passage across editions, see Kojirō Katō’s
forthcoming edition of the text. As an example, it is interesting to compare
the syntax of D and F. D: don dam yang dag ’phags pas ni sems can gyi khams na
sems can rnams kyis kun brtags pa’i ngo bo nyid ngo bo nyid kyis tha dad par mthong
zhing gzhan gyi dbang gi ngo bo nyid dang / yongs su grub pa’i ngo bo nyid kyang
ngo bo nyid kyis tha dad par mthong na/ de’i phyir ngo bo nyid med pa nyid rnam pa
gsum mi ’dogs kyi. Interestingly, L, S, and T are in agreement with D, as are C,
J, N. P. VD, VG, and VP. Only F offers a variant reading (folio 25.b): don dam
yang dag ’phags sems can gyi khams ni/ sems can rnams kyis kun brtags pa’i rang
bzhin ngo bo nyid kyis tha dad par mi mthong / gzhan gyi dbang gi rang bzhin dang /
yongs su grub pa’i rang bzhin yang ngo bo nyid kyis tha dad par yang mi mthong ste/
de’i phyir ngas rang bzhin med pa rnams gsum du gzhag go. F explains why the
Buddha taught an essencelessness by referring to beings as not perceiving a
distinct essence in the three natures: “Paramārthasamudgata, beings in the
world of beings do not consider the imaginary essence as different from an
essence. They do not even consider the other-dependent essence and the
actual essence as different from an essence. As a consequence, I presented
the threefold essencelessness.” This does not make much sense. I therefore
follow the reading found in D. Frauwallner chose to follow D very closely
here. He takes as the subject of the verb mi ’dogs the Buddha, like Powers and
Lamotte: “Ich habe … die dreifache Wesenlosigkeit nicht verkündet, weil die
Lebewesen in der Sphäre der Lebewesen das vorgestellte Wesen seinem
Wesen nach als etwas Verschiedenes ansehen, und weil sie das abhängige
Wesen und das vollkommene Wesen seinem Wesen nach als etwas
Verschiedenes ansehen.” Lamotte’s translation (Lamotte 1935, p. 196) reads,
“Si j’expose [for ’dogs] la triple Irréalité, ce n’est pas parce que les êtres, dans
le monde des êtres, considèrent la nature imaginaire comme une nature
distincte, ou les natures dépendante et absolue comme des natures
distinctes. Au contraire…” With “au contraire,” Lamotte expresses the
adversative function of the particle kyi at the end of the clause de’i phyir ngo
bo nyid med pa nyid rnam pa gsum mi ’dogs kyi. To achieve this, Lamotte reads
mi ’dogs in an affirmative mode and in the negative the statement regarding

復次勝義⽣⾮由
有情界中諸有情類別觀遍計所執⾃性為⾃性故。亦⾮由彼別觀依他起⾃性及圓成
實⾃性為⾃性故我⽴三種無⾃性性。然由有情於依他起⾃性及圓成實⾃性上增益
遍計所執⾃性故我⽴三種無⾃性性 (Cbeta, Taishō 676).
beings, which is in agreement with Xuanzang’s translation:

n.148

sems; citta. This is one of the synonyms for the subliminal mind (kun gzhi rnam
par shes pa; ālayavijñāna) as explained in chapter 5. See chapters 5 and 6 on the

latent disposition of the mind through karmic seeds in the sense of
conventions.
n.149

bag la nyal; anuśaya. In the sense of “adhering/sticking” and “being
latent/inclined” here (see Schmithausen 2014, p. 687).

n.150

Powers’ translation does not render the meaning of this sentence: “Due to
these causes and conditions, in the future [this view of] the own-being of the
other-dependent proliferates.” (Powers 1995, p. 107). The other-dependent in
the sense of dependent arising refers here to rebirth and future lives.

n.151

yang dag par (“perfectly”) is important here, as it echoes the statement above
and without it the entire paragraph loses its meaning: to achieve perfect
liberation, the teaching on essencelessness with regard to both defining
characteristics and the ultimate is necessary.

n.152

L, S, T, and F (e.g., F, folio 27.a) logically confirm shes pa, which is interesting
since it establishes a distinction between occurrences of shes pa and ye shes,
which D does not do systematically (see Kojirō Katō’s edition of chapter 7).
The term here is a synonym for sems; see the parallel passage above in 7.10.

n.153

F, folio 27.a, has lam ’di nyid dang ’grod pa ’di nyid kyis instead of D: lam ’di nyid
dang sgrub pa ’di nyid kyis grub pa dang. C, H, J, N, and Kǫ also read sgrub; VD,
VG, VP: bsgrub; L, S: bgrod; F, T: ’grod. (cf. Kojirō Katō’s edition).

n.154

don dam yang dag ’phags nyan thos kyi rigs can gang zag zhi ba’i bgrod pa gcig pu pa
ni sangs rgyas thams cad brtson pa dang ldan par gyur kyang byang chub kyi snying
po la bzhag ste. Brunnhölzl reads the qualifying clause sangs rgyas thams cad
brtson pa dang ldan par gyur in quite a different way here: “even if all buddhas
with [all] their effort] were [to attempt] to establish persons with the śrāvaka
disposition…” (Brunnhölzl 2018, p. 1522).

n.155

’du byed mngon par ’du bya ba; saṃskārābhisaṃskaraṇa. Compare with the Sanskrit
sentence in Tucci’s edition of Bhāvanākrama (Tucci 1971, p. 22): ekāntasattvārthavimukhasya ekāntasaṃsārābhisaṃskāravimukhasya [nā]uttarā samyaksaṃbodhir uktā
mayeti, which has saṃsārābhisaṃskāra instead of saṃskārābhisaṃskaraṇa as found
in Tibetan.

n.156

chos; dharma.

n.157

drang po dang drang po’i rang bzhin can/ rtog pa dang sel mi nus pa. Powers
understands rtog pa dang sel as “to remove conceptuality.” (Powers 1995,
p. 117). F, folio 28.b reads, brtag pa dang / bzhig pa mi nus pa. The problem is that
sel is a transitive verb. It is therefore syntactically difficult to take rtog pa as

the object of sel. In the present case, Keenan’s solution based on Chinese is
interesting: “to make judgments” (Keenan 2000, p. 42).
n.158

zhib mo brtags pa’i mkhas pa dang ’dzangs pas rig pa; sūkṣmaṃ
nipuṇapaṇḍitavijñavedanīyaḥ (see Mvyut 2918). Lit. “It is to be known.” All
Sanskrit synonyms for this sentence are found in Mvyut 2013–20.

n.159

In accordance with the multiple occurrences of this phrase in chapter 2, shes
pa should be read here as ye shes in agreement with F.

n.160

See Lamotte 1935, p. 201, n. 31: las kyi sgrib chen po refers here to
saddharmapratikṣepakarmāvaraṇa.

n.161

chos ’dul ba; dharmavinaya (read as a dvandva).
I read rnam par rtog pa’i spyod yul kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid kyi gnas ’du byed kyi

n.162

mtshan ma (D) as a karmadhāraya, which means that the last compound in the
series of three should be topicalized. It seems to me that since the opposition
between nimitta (“phenomenal appearance”) and svabhāva or svalakṣaṇa
(“unique/specific/particular defining characteristic or essence”) is central
throughout the text, reading the compound in this way clarifies the meaning
of this definition of the parikalpita, which basically results from the operation
consisting in attributing an essence to appearance by means of verbal
conventions.

n.163

This definition elaborates on the definition of parikalpitasvabhāva formulated
in 6.4. In 6.5 and 6.7; that which has the defining characteristic of dependent
arising is equated with phenomenal appearance. On the basis of what is
dependent on an other, essence is imputed in the sense of a real entity,
independent of any other cause to exist as what it is. This corresponds to the
imaginary defining characteristic.

n.164

Lamotte’s translation is built on the same structure but inverts the main
clauses of the sentence: In the nimitta, the parikalpita is unestablished. See
Lamotte 1935, p. 204.

n.165

Lamotte’s translation is built on the same structure but inverts the main
clauses of the sentence: In the nimitta, the parikalpita is unestablished. See
Lamotte 1935, p. 204. D: kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid der yongs su ma grub. I read
kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid as a bahuvrīhi: “that which has the imaginary
defining characteristic” or “that which consists in/is characterized by the
imaginary.”

n.166

yang dag pa’i ting nge ’dzin; samyaksamādhi.

n.167

D: bcom ldan ’das nges pa’i don bstan pa ’di should be read bcom ldan ’das kyi (or
kyis as in VD) nges pa’i don bstan pa ’di, lit. “of the Blessed One,” rendered here
as “[expounded] by the Blessed One.” bcom ldan ’das is omitted in L, S, T, and
F; see Katō’s edition of chapter 7.

n.168

Lamotte and Powers understand the statement “All phenomena are without
an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa” to be the teaching of definitive meaning
(see Lamotte 1935, p. 206 and Powers 1995, pp. 135–37). However, the entire
point of this chapter is that there is an underlying intent of definitive
meaning to this statement. This is the reason why it is explained in the next
paragraphs that a third turning of the wheel of Dharma was necessary.

n.169

D: de bzhin du chos rnams kyi ngo bo nyid ma mchis pa nyid las brtsams/ skye ba ma
mchis pa dang / ’gag pa ma mchis pa dang / gzod ma nas zhi ba dang / rang bzhin gyis
yongs su mya ngan las ’das pa nyid las brtsams nas/ bcom ldan ’das nges pa’i don
bstan pa ’di yang drang ba’i don gyi mdo sde thams cad du stsal bar bgyi pa lags so. C,
H, J, N, Kǫ, VG, VP, L, S, T, and F also read stsal; VD: bstsal (cf. Kojirō Katō’s
edition). Lamotte translates stsal with “se recommande” to create a parallel
construction with the analogy of the dried ginger (see Lamotte 1935, p. 205).
This somehow does not solve our problem. Powers translates stsal bar gyi
with a past tense “placed” (see Powers 1995, p. 137). Keenan 2000, p. 48
offers a Literal rendering of Xuanzang’s translation that is similar to the

如是世尊依此諸法皆無⾃性無⽣無滅本來寂靜⾃性
涅槃無⾃性性了義⾔教遍於⼀切不了義經皆應安處, Cbeta, Taishō 676): “just so,
Tibetan version of the text (

World-Honored One, the explicit teaching that all things have no-essence,
no arising, and no passing away, are originally quiescent, and are essentially
in cessation must be put into all the scriptures of implicit meaning.”
n.170

D: drang ba’i don rtsod pa’i gzhi’i gnas su gyur pa lags la in the sense of drang ba’i
don lags te/ rtsod pa’i gzhi’i gnas su gyur pa lags la as in nges pa’i don lags te/ rtsod
pa’i gzhi’i gnas su gyur pa ma lags so (see D, folio 25.a).

n.171

This is an important statement regarding the intent of the third turning of
the wheel, which is to bring together those following the hearers’ and the
bodhisattvas’ paths within a single vehicle.

n.172

By repeating the same statement to describe the second and third turnings, it
is made clear that interpreting this statement in terms of emptiness alone is
provisional. The underlying intent of the statement corresponds to the
teaching found in the third turning.

n.173

Lit. “Blessed One, what is the name of that which has been taught as a
Dharma discourse ascertaining the [Tathāgata’s] intent?”

n.174

gzung bar bgyi; dhārayāmi (cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte
VIII.41). I suggest reading dhārayāmi, which is a causative present of dhṛ-, as
an optative here.

n.175

This refers to byang chub kyi sems; bodhicitta.

n.176

This paragraph follows the pattern according to which prajñā is developed as
śrutamayī prajñā, cintāmayī prajñā, bhāvanāmayī prajñā. Once the bodhisattvas
have heard and contemplated what has been taught, they proceed with
practice.

n.177

Read thob instead of thos. See F, folio 36.b: lus shin tu sbyangs pa dang / sems shin
tu sbyangs pa de dag thob pa de’i bar du and lus shin tu sbyangs pa dang / sems shin
tu sbyangs pa de dag thob kyi bar du (8.5).

n.178

D: de lus shin tu sbyangs pa dang / sems shin tu sbyangs pa de thos nas de nyid la gnas
te/ sems kyi rnam pa spangs nas ji ltar bsams pa’i chos de dag nyid nang du ting nge
’dzin gyi spyod yul gzugs brnyan du so sor rtog par byed mos par byed do. S, folio
37.b; F, folio 36.a: des lus shin tu sbyangs pa dang / sems shin tu sbyangs pa de dag
thos nas de nyid la gnas te/ ji ltar bsams pa’i chos de dag nyid nang du ting nge ’dzin
gyi spyod yul gzugs brnyan du sems kyi rnam pa spangs nas/ so sor rtog cing byed
mor byed do.

n.179

For a detailed discussion of 8.7–9, refer to Schmithausen 2014, p. 391ff.

n.180

rab tu phye ba; prabhāvita in the compound *ālambanavijñaptimātraprabhāvita (see
Schmithausen 1984, p. 436; 2014, pp. 400–1 passim). On the possible
meanings of the Sanskrit term prabhāvita in the sense of “consisting of” or
“characterized as” as opposed to “characterized by,” refer to Schmithausen
2014, p. 400, n. 1770.

n.181

The compound dmigs pa rnam par rig pa tsam; *ālambanavijñaptimātra can be
read as a tatpuruṣa: “the mere representation of a referential object,” or as a
karmadhāraya: “a referential object that is a mere representation” or “a mere
representation as a referential object” (see Schmithausen 2014, p. 411). If we
add to these possibilities the distinction between “characterized as/consists
of” and “characterized by” mentioned by Schmithausen in reference to
prabhāvita (see n.181), it is clear that this important statement can be
interpreted in various ways that are consistent with the syntax of this
sentence. If one wishes to read the compound *ālambanavijñaptimātra as a
tatpuruṣa, the phrase reads “the mere representation of a referential object.”

However, it seems to me that we should read this compound as a
karmadhāraya, since the whole point of this paragraph is to answer
Maitreya’s original question about the nature of the image qua object. The
answer to this question is that the image (pratibimba) that is the object of
concentration is not distinct from mind because mind is constituted by a
representation that is the actual object of this cognition. With regard to this
issue, Xuanzang’s translation reads,

善男⼦當⾔無異何以故由彼影像唯是識故

善男⼦我說識所緣唯識所現故 (Cbeta, Taishō 676), which is compatible with
the suggested translation. For a complete analysis of these two sentences
across selected Chinese and Tibetan editions, see Schmithausen 2014,
p. 392ff. and Brunnhölzl 2018, p. 511, n. 139, which contains a detailed
summary of Schmithausen’s analysis.
n.182

On VIII.7, see Brunnhölzl 2018, p. 512, n. 141.

n.183

D: bcom ldan ’das sems can rnams kyi gzugs la sogs par snang ba sems kyi gzugs
brnyan rang bzhin du gnas pa gang lags pa de yang sems de dang tha dad pa ma lags
zhes bgyi’am; S, folio 38.b: bcom ldan ’das sems can rnams kyi sems kyi gzugs brnyan
rang bzhin du gnas pa/ gzugs la sogs pa gang lags de yang sems de dang tha dad pa ma
lags shes bgyi’am; F, folio 37.a: bcom ldan ’das sems can rnams kyi sems kyi gzugs
brnyan rang bzhin du gnas pa/ gzugs la tshogs pa de dag kyang sems de dang tha dad
pa ma lags shes bgyi’am.

n.184

D: mtshan nyid la byed pa. F, folio 37.b: mtshan nyid yid la byed pa.

n.185

sems kyi mtshan nyid but sems kyi mtshan ma would be better here since
Maitreya inquires about mtshan ma right after this. Unfortunately,
Xuanzang’s translation does not contribute to solving this quandary since
can refer to both lakṣaṇa and nimitta (see

相

若相續作意唯思维⼼相, Cbeta, Taishō

676). However, the structure of the paragraph in which questions are asked
about definitions of terms found in the Buddha’s previous answer in 8.8
indicates that we should emend sems kyi mtshan nyid to sems kyi mtshan ma.
n.186

Based on the definitions above, it appears that one-pointedness of mind
refers to the state in which appearance (the object of the practice of insight),
representation (the object of the practice of mental stillness), and emptiness
(the nature of reality as explained in the previous chapters) are in unity.

n.187

so sor rtog pa in the sense of “comprehension/realization” (pratibodha)

n.188

Compare D: de dang der shes rab kyis shin tu legs par ma rtogs pa’i chos de dag nyid
shin tu legs par rtogs par [F.28.a] bya ba’i phyir yid la byed pa’i lhag mthong gang yin
pa’o with S, folio 39.b: gang de dang des shes rab kyis legs par ma rtogs pa’i chos de

dag nyid legs par rtogs par bya ba’i phyir de nyid yid la byed pa’i lhag mthong ngo
and F, folio 38.a: gang shes rab kyis legs par ma rtogs pa’i chos de dang de dag la legs
par rtogs par bya ba’i phyir de nyid yid la byed pa’i lhag mthong ngo.
n.189

The last four meditation objects represent the four seals of Dharma (phyag
rgya bzhi; caturmudrā).

n.190

ma ’dres pa’i chos. On ma ’dres pa’i chos and ’dres pa’i chos, see Brunnhölzl 2018,
p. 561, n. 322. Brunnhölzl translates ’dres pa’i chos as “dharmas in fusion.”
Considering dharmas without fusing them means considering them
individually. However, 8.14 seems to indicate that dharma is used here in the
sense of “teaching” rather than “phenomenon.”

n.191

gnas gyur pa; āśrayaparivṛtti. I chose to translate this technical term with “shift
in one’s basis [of existence]” or “shift of the basis [of existence]” instead of
“transformation of the basis” as is usually the case. The āśrayaparivṛtti in
Saṃdh. is an attainment that is obtained after the ālayavijñāna has ceased (see
Schmithausen 1987, p. 198 and Schmithausen 2014, p. 37). In this sūtra, the
ālaya therefore does not seem to be equated with the āśraya. In chapter 10, the
basis is evoked in relation to the truth body (dharmakāya). According to 10.2
and 8.35.11, it appears that the basis one possesses once all corruption has
been eliminated is none other than the truth body after it has been purified
of adventitious defilements (see Xing 2005, p. 97), at least in the case of the
bodhisattvas. The dhāraṇī in 10.8 makes it clear that conceptions of being
defiled or purified have in fact no raison d’être. From the perspective of true
reality, they are completely adventitious. As stated by the Buddha at the
conclusion of 10.8, bodhisattvas exchange the body afflicted by corruption
for the body of truth or actual body, the dharmakāya. In line with this
interpretation, āśraya is read as a quasi-synonym for kāya as in the expression
āśrayapādātṛ (on this term, see Schmithausen 2014, p. 331, §272.1). This reading
seems to be confirmed, for example, in YBht P ’i 30b4f (see ibid., pp. 521–22,
§483), which explains the āśrayaparivṛtti as the completely purified
dharmadhātu, which is permanent and inconceivable. Schmithausen adds, “At
the same time, it [this passage of the Ybht] stresses the permanence of āśrayaparivṛtti (in the ontological perspective), precluding thereby a causal process
in the strict sense.” Elsewhere, Schmithausen refers to this term as “the
[accomplished] āśrayaparivṛtti or purification of the tathatā” (Schmithausen
2014, p. 527, 536ff.). While there is certainly a multiplicity of interpretations
with regard to this complex matter, it seems to me that this reading is
precisely what is meant in Saṃdh. In that sense, āśrayaparivṛtti, as a result
(phala), corresponds to an unveiling (see Schmithausen 2014, p. 537) or
purification of the basis in the form of a return, a restoration, a restitution, or

a re-entry into the dharmakāya, tathatā, or dharmadhātu. The synonyms given in
the list above (true reality, awakening, and nirvāṇa) show that āśrayaparivṛtti
does not refer to afflicted dharmas, which would be the case if the
ālayavijñāna was meant here. To conclude this discussion, it seems on the
basis of Sakuma’s work (Sakuma 1990) that we are in presence of (at least)
two models of āśrayaparivṛtti: (1) an originally ontological model, as found in
the Śrāvakabhūmi, in which the psychophysical base (lit. the basis of
existence) of the person practicing śamatha and vipaśyanā is transformed, as
dauṣṭhulya is replaced by praśrabdhi; and (2) a cognitive or epistemic model
using this originally ontological terminology to express the purification of
the tathatā. In this model, the purification as an elimination of the dauṣṭhulya
alone is the manifestation of the dharmakāya that is not the creation of a
causal process transforming an entity conceived in ontological terms, as
repeatedly stated throughout the later chapters of Saṃdh. In this latter
model, the cognitive purification of the tathatā as a causal process can only
make sense from the perspective of conventional truth (see chapter 3). From
the ultimate standpoint of realization, nothing was ever purified by anyone
(cf. dhāraṇī in 10.8). As a consequence of this (and following William
Waldron’s suggestion), I would like to make clear that the “shift in one’s
basis of existence” referred to in Saṃdh. is a cognitive restoration of the
basis in which the attainment of gnosis plays a central role, from the
perspective of conventional truth. In the present context, one should therefore
refrain from interpreting the term āśrayaparivṛtti as implying any ontological
commitment to the process thereby described. To conclude on this point, I
understand āśrayaparivṛtti in Saṃdh. as implying a “doctrine of
(re-)embodiment” as explained in Radich 2007, p. 1109ff. At the end of the
path, one has as a basis of existence the truth body in lieu of the body
afflicted by corruption as mentioned above, hence the notion of a shift.
n.192

chos; dharma.

n.193

D: byams pa mdo’i sde nas shin tu rgyas pa’i sde dang / rmad du byung ba’i chos kyi
sde dang / gtan la bab par bstan pa’i sde’i bar dag so sor gcig tu bzlums te … [F.29.a]
mdo’i sde la sogs pa de dag nyid ji snyed bzung ba dang / bsams pa so sor gcig tu
bzlums te yid la byed pa ni ’dres pa chen por gyur pa’i chos la dmigs pa yin par rig par
bya’o. F, folio 39.a: so sor gcig tu bsdu ba te … bsam pa de dag nyid gcig tu bsdu ba
byas te. I followed F and did not translate so sor in the sentence pertaining to
the highly universal teaching (’dres pa chen por gyur pa’i chos).

n.194

On this point, see 8.13 above.

n.195

rtog pa; vitarka. For the translation of vitarka and vicāra, see Cousins 1992, p.
147.

n.196

See F, folio 40.a: gsal zhing che bar myong ba’i rjes su dpyod pa. This construction
is also found in the following sentences in F.

n.197

Lit. “experienced as subtle,” according to F, or “the experience of the subtle”
according to D.

n.198

On this point, see 8.10.

n.199

See 8.9: “What is the unimpeded mind? Maitreya, it is the referential object of
mental stillness, the mind that takes the image as an object.”

n.200

See 8.9: “Blessed One, what is a mental appearance? Maitreya, this is the
referential object of insight, the conceptual image that is the object of
concentration.”

n.201

nye ba’i nyon mongs; upakleśa.

n.202

These two expressions refer to dharmapratisaṃvid and arthapratisaṃvid.
Lamotte and Powers opted for “object” and Keenan for “meaning” for artha,
while dharma is usually translated with “Dharma.” For an interpretation of
the term in the sense of the translation suggested above, refer to Nance 2012,
pp. 58–59, 72, 74–75, 135, 227–28, and 233–35. The same interpretation is
found in Lamotte 1970, p. 1617ff.: dharma is translated with “designation” and
artha with “chose.”

n.203

ji lta ba bzhin du yod pa nyid; yathāvadbhāvikatā. On yāvadbhāvikatā and
yathāvadbhāvikatā, see Takasaki 1966, p. 173.

n.204

mthar thug pa; paryanta, in the sense here of “entirety.”

n.205

For the Sanskrit of these seven, see Nagao 1964, p. 43.

n.206

See F, folio 41.a: rnam par rig pa’i de bzhin nyid ni gang / ’du byed rnam par rig pa
tsam mo.

n.207

log par sgrub pa; mithyāpratipatti. In F, sgrub pa is translated with nan tan (see for
example F, folio 41.b).

n.208

D: byams pa de la yang dag par sgrub pa’i de bzhin nyid des ni thos pa thams cad ’dres
pa’i chos la dmigs pa’i zhi gnas dang lhag mthong gi bsdus pa’i shes rab mtshungs
shing mnyam mo. F, folio 41.b: byams pa gang yang dag pa’i nan tan de bzhin nyid
des ni thos pa dang bsams pa dang / bsgoms pa’i ’dres pa la dmigs pa’i zhi gnas dang

lhag mthong gis yongs su zin pa’i shes rab mtshungs shing mnyam mo. Xuanzang’s
translation confirms the reading found in D:

聽聞正法緣總境界勝奢摩他毘缽舍

那所受慧平等平等 (Cbeta, Taishō 676). However, F makes sense from the
perspective of the meaning of this chapter.
n.209

See Z, folio 38.a: rnam par grol bar byed instead of D: rnam par grol bar shes.

n.210

See Z, folio 37.b, F, folio 43.a: chos de dag nyid la instead of D: chos de dag nyid
las.

n.211

We find slightly variant readings in F and D. D: byams pa de la rab tu rig par
byed pa ni mngon sum du byas pa’i chos de dag nyid las rnam par grol bar shes pa
dang / gzhan dag la yang rgya cher ston pa dang / yang dag par ston pa gang yin pa
ste. F, folio 43.a: byams pa de la shes par byed pa ni gang mngon sum du byas pa’i
chos de dag nyid la rnam par grol bar shes pa dang / rgya cher yang gzhan la ston cing
’chad pa dang / yang dag par ston pa’o.

n.212

In accordance with F, folio 44.b, shes pa should be read here also as ye shes.

n.213

The phrase is repeated throughout the text. Here shes pa should be read as ye
shes, a reading confirmed by F.

n.214

See 8.23, in which the three arthapratisaṃvid are letters, meanings, and
contexts.

n.215

mtshan ma corresponds here to a reflection (gzugs brnyan; pratibimba).

n.216

so sor brtags pa; pratisaṃkhyā. D: zhes bka’ stsal pa gang lags pa de la sems kyis so sor
brtag pa ni gang lags.

n.217

rnam par rig pa’i de bzhin nyid; see 8.20.2, in which the true reality of
representations corresponds to the fact that “all conditioned phenomena are
just a representation.” In the preceding sentence, I added the term ‘truth’
(dharma) to render a frequent collocation that clarifies the meaning of this
statement.

n.218

Lamotte reads chos dang don respectively as “Dharma” and “chose” (“thing”);
see Lamotte 1935, p. 225. Powers reads them as “doctrine” and “meaning”;
see Powers 1995, p. 189. However, as explained above (see 8.19–21), I
understand these two technical terms to refer to “designation” and “objects
of designations.” Lamotte’s rendering of the syntax of the entire passage
appears to be inaccurate: “Pour celui qui…, il y a…”

n.219

See 8.20.3.

n.220

See 8.20.4.

n.221

skyes pa dang / bud med kyi bsnyen bkur, probably for upasthāna-kāri/-kārikā, “(a
woman) serving, doing service to (a man, sexually; said of a courtesan)”; see
Edgerton 1953, p. 143.

n.222

In the case of *viśuddhyālambana, one can read the Sanskrit compound as a
genitive or dative tatpuruṣa; see Schmithausen 2014, p. 363, n. 1648 and
p. 362, n. 1644. I read rnam par dag pa’i de bzhin nyid as *viśuddhitathatā in
accordance with Schmithausen 2014, pp. 362–63, §306.5, and n. 1647.

n.223

gzugs brnyan; pratibimba; see 8.1–10 for the meaning of the image in the
context of contemplative practice.

n.224

See Schmithausen 2014, p. 366, n. 1664 quoting YBht P’i 83a5f: de de la mi dmigs
pa gang yin pa and F, folio 46.b: de’ang mi dmigs pa instead of D, folio 34.b: de la
de dmigs pa gang yin pa.

顧戀⾝財.

n.225

lus dang longs spyod la lta ba;

n.226

This reference remains obscure. Could this point be directed at outcast
bodhisattvas (byang chub sems dpa’ gdol ba; bodhisattvacāṇḍāla), namely,
bodhisattvas taking pride in detachment who practice in the way of hearers?
See Conze 1975, p. 438ff.?

n.227

D has bcom ldan ’das ci tsam gyis na zhi gnas kyi lam yongs su dag pa lags/ byams pa
gang gi tshe rmugs pa dang gnyid legs par rab tu choms par gyur pa’o/ /bcom ldan ’das
ji tsam gyis na lhag mthong gi lam yongs su dag pa lags/ byams pa gang gi tshe rgod
pa dad ’gyod pa legs par rab tu choms par gyur pa’o, but one should read bcom ldan
’das ci tsam gyis na zhi gnas kyi lam yongs su dag pa lags/ byams pa gang gi tshe rgod
pa dad ’gyod pa legs par rab tu choms par gyur pa’o/ /bcom ldan ’das ji tsam gyis na
lhag mthong gi lam yongs su dag pa lags/ byams pa gang gi tshe rmugs pa dang gnyid
dang the tshom legs par rab tu choms par gyur pa’o. See F, folio 47.a, which seems
to indicate that the list of terms in D is incomplete and in the wrong order.

n.228

theg pa chen po dang ldan pa; mahāyānapratisaṃyukta.

n.229

nyon mongs pa dang shes bya’i sgrib pa; kleśajñeyāvaraṇa.

n.230

The reading of this passage found in D is problematic on account of the
double la particle in the second part of the sentence: de legs par bcom pas thams
cad la chags pa med pa dang / thogs pa med pa’i shes pa dang / mthong ba thob cing
dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa la chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par dag pa la gnas pa
yin no. Compare with VD, folio 77.a: de legs par bcom pas chos kyi sku shin tu rnam

par dag pa la gnas pa na/ dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa la/ thams cad du chags
pa med pa dang/ thogs pa med pa’i shes pa dang mthong ba thob po. Kǫ, folio 39.a: de
legs par bcom pas thams cad la chags pa med pa dang / thogs pa med pa’i shes pa dang /
mthong ba thob cing dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa la cha shas kyi sku shin tu
rnam par dag pa la gnas pa yin no. S, folio 51.b: de legs par bcom pa’i phyir/ chos kyi
sku shin tu rnam par dag pa la gnas pas/ dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa la thams
cad du mi thogs mi chags pa’i ye shes mthong ba rab tu thob bo. F, folio 48.a: de bcom
pa’i phyir chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par dag pa la gnas pas/ dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i
dmigs pa la thams cad du mi thogs mi chags pa’i ye shes mthong ba rab tu thob po. Bd,
folio 54: de legs par bcom pas chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par dag pa la gnas pa na/
dgongs pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa thams cad la chags pa med pa dang / thogs pa
med pa’i shes pa dang / mthong ba thob po. L, folio 48.a: de bcom pa’i phyir/ chos kyi
sku shin tu rnam par dag pa la gnas pas/ dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa la thams
cad du mi thogs mi chags pa’i ye shes mthong ba rab tu thob bo. (similar to F,
folio 48.a). He, folio 102b: de bcom ldan pa’i phyir chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par dag
pa la gnas pas dgongs pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa dang/ thams cad du mi thogs mi
chags pa’i ye shes mthong ba rab tu ’thob po/First, a few general remarks: Kǫ
follows the syntax of D with an important variation cha shas kyi sku instead of
chos kyi sku in D. In some other editions, such as F, L, and He as well as in Bd
(which seems to be a compromise between D and K ǫ, on one side, and F and
L on the other side), the syntax of the sentence is quite distinct from D and
Kǫ; see for example VD in which entire blocks of text are found in a different
order. In addition, we find in other minor variant readings, such as dgongs pa
in apposition to yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa (see Bd) instead of the more usual
dgos pa.I therefore suggest the following emendations: One should read ye
shes mthong ba instead of shes pa dang / mthong ba since we find in various
forms the well-known collocation ma chags ma thogs pa’i ye shes mthong ba in
Mvyut: ’das pa’i dus la ma chags ma thogs pa’i ye shes gzigs par ’jug go; ’das pa’i dus
la ma chags ma thogs pa’i ye shes mthong ba ’jug pa, atīte ’dhvany asaṅgam
apratihataṃ jñānadarśanaṃ pravartate (Mvyut 151) or da ltar gyi dus la ma chags ma
thogs pa’i ye shes gzigs par ’jug go; da ltar gyi dus la ma chags ma thogs pa’i ye shes
mthong ba ’jug pa, pratyutpanne ’dhvany asaṅgam apratihatam jñānadarśanaṃ
pravartate (Mvyut 153).Based on the fact that jñānadarśana results from having
discarded the obstructions, a doctrine already present in the Pāli tradition, F
and L probably give a better account of the logical sequence of this passage:
(1) first, obstructions are eliminated; (2) thereupon, one remains in the
dharmakāya, which has been completely purified from these obstructions; (3)
as a consequence of this, the insight into the accomplishment of the
goal/intention, which is the real object, arises together with gnosis free from
attachment and hindrance. In this context, jñānadarśana is interpreted as a
dvandva (“gnosis and vision”).My suggestion for this passage would thus

be quite close to Bd, folio 54: de legs par bcom pas chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par
dag pa la gnas pa na (or gnas pas)/ dgos pa yongs su grub pa’i dmigs pa la thams cad
du chags pa med pa dang / thogs pa med pa’i ye shes mthong ba thob po. (underlined
words are additions to Bd. dang between shes and mthong ba was omitted).
n.231

Some editions (e.g., F) include ji ltar in the second clause: “once bodhisattvas
have obtained mental stillness and insight, how do they attain the
unsurpassable, complete, and perfect awakening?” The difference is not
significant because the attainment of the fourth object of mental stillness and
insight, the accomplishment of the goal, corresponds to the attainment of
awakening (see 8.2).

n.232

See 8.20.2.

n.233

F, folio 48.b reads legs par rtogs pa instead of D, which has simply bzung ba.

n.234

lhag par btang snyoms; adhyupekṣya.

n.235

See 8.20.2.

n.236

F, folio 49.a ye shes instead of shes pa in D.

n.237

D reads, de la nang gi so so’i bdag nyid la so sor rang rig pa de bzhin nyid rnam pa
bdun so sor rtog pa’i shes pa rnam pa bdun skye bar ’gyur te. Compare with F,
folio 49.a: de bzhin nyid rnam pa bdun bden bden pa’i rnam pa nang gi so so rang gis
shes par bya ba rab tu rtogs pa’i ye shes skye bar ’gyur te. I think F is more in the
spirit of this paragraph than D. The notion of so sor rtog pa’i shes pa is at odds
with nang gi so so’i bdag nyid la so sor rang rig pa, to which it stands in
apposition in D. Instead, I’d rather read here rab tu rtogs pa’i ye shes as found
in F.

n.238

yang dag pa nyid skyon med pa (D) or yang dag pa mi ’gyur ba (F);
samyaktvaniyama.

n.239

These are the first three of the four objects of mental stillness and insight as
explained in 8.2. The fourth is the accomplishment of the goal.

n.240

This refers to the first three objects of mental stillness and insight; see 8.2.

n.241

See 8.35.11 above for a more detailed elucidation of this point.

n.242

Lit. “They are skillful with regard to the arising of the mind as it is if they
know the sixteen points of the arising of the mind. The sixteen points of the
arising of the mind are the arising of…”

n.243

See 5.3.

n.244

See 8.20.2.

n.245

D reads yang dag pa’i tshor ba, probably in the sense of yang dag pa’i don gyi (or
la) tshor ba, but F, folio 50.a has instead ’gag par ’gyur ba’i tshor ba (but the
sentence in F is not built according to a pronominal relative-correlative
structure as it is in D).

n.246

D reads rig pa in the sense of rnam par rig pa, while F, folio 50.a has tshor ba
instead, which makes more sense in the present context. This reading is
supported by Xuanzang’s reading:
Taishō 676), in which

⼀者所依粗重受⼆者彼果境界受 (Cbeta,

受 refers to vedanā. I therefore emended the entire

paragraph accordingly.
n.247

In the sense of sensations being the cause for future sensations as explained
above (see 8.38.1.iv).

n.248

Sanskrit reads evam eva; see Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte XIII.39.

n.249

D: rigs kyi bu rnams dang / rigs kyi bu mo dag gis ’di la shin tu brtson par bya ba’i rigs
so. Sanskrit: ayam atra kulaputraiḥ kuladuhitṛbhir vā tīvravyāyāmair bhavituṃ (see
Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.39).

n.250

de’i tshe, tasyāṃ velāyam (cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte
VIII.39).

n.251

D: chos rnams gdags pa rnam gzhag gang yin pa/ /de ni rnal ’byor bag yod don chen
yin; in Sanskrit: dharmāna prajñaptivyavasthito yo hi yoge pramattā na mahā[rtha] so
hī. (see Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40). The sentence is built
according to a correlative-relative structure yaḥ … sa…, literally “that which
is … is…” The Sanskrit here is of a hybrid nature as pointed out by Matsuda.
Instead of pramattā na, apramāda would be expected for the Tibetan bag yod.

n.252

D: gang dag chos der brten nas rnal ’byor ’dir/ /yang dag brtson pa de dag byang chub
’thob; Sanskrit: taṃ dharmaṃ niśrāya ye atra yoge samyakprayukta te labha(ṃ)ti bodhi
(see Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.253

D: gang dag glags lta de skad rgol ba las/ thar bar lta ba chos kun chub byed pa/ /byams
pa de dag rnal ’byor ’di las ni/ /thag ring gnas sa ring ba ji bzhin no; Sanskrit:
upāraṃbhaprekṣā iti vādamokṣaprekṣā ye dharmaṃ sarva pu .. ../ (see Matsuda 2013,
p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.254

blo ldan; dhīmān (cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.255

The Tibetan reads sems can don zhes while the Sanskrit has satvārthasāra (cf.
Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40). Sāra means both

“real meaning”/“quintessence” and “wealth”/“riches.”
n.256

D: blo ldan sems can don zhes de dag las/ /lan byed rig nas sems can don brtson
min; Sanskrit: satvārthasāro na tu kāra tebhyaṃ viditva satvārthaprayukta dhīmān.

n.257

Eva in Sanskrit (see Matsuda 2013: p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.258

… ca … ca in Sanskrit (see Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.259

zang zing med pa; nirāmiṣa (in the sense of “disinterested, not expecting a
reward”; see Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40 for the Sanskrit term).

n.260

Sanskrit: punar (see Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.261

Anagharatna (cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40).

n.262

spongs zhing rgyu; caraṃti bhikṣāṃ (cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad
Lamotte VIII.40). The term bhikṣā literally corresponds to the French concept
of “mendicité.”

n.263

gzung bar bgyi; dhārayāmi (cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte
VIII.41). I suggest reading dhārayāmi, which is a causative present, as an
optative here.

n.264

This concluding passage is similar to the one concluding chapter 7 (see 7.33).

n.265

Sanskrit reads adhimukti; see Matsuda 1995, p. 67.

n.266

Sanskrit reads suparibhāvitādhimuktikṣanti; see Matsuda 1995, p. 67.

n.267

See 7.31: “they develop devotion for [this teaching] and commission its
transcription into writing. Once it has been put into writing, they keep it in
mind, read it, venerate it, propagate it, expound it, chant it aloud,
contemplate it, and apply it in their practice.”

n.268

D reads shin tu bsgoms pa’i phyir bzod pas sa de las yang dag par ’das nas byang
chub sems dpa’i yang dag pa nyid skyon med pa la ’jug go. The term bzod pas
appears to be out of place here and should have been found in the preceding
clause, as is the case in the Sanskrit text, which in addition contains no
parallel to phyir.

n.269

byang chub kyi phyogs dang mthun pa’i chos; bodhyaṅga. D, folio 39.b reads byang
chub kyi phyogs dang ’thun ba’i chos ji ltar thob pa dag gis, but F, folio 52.a has
byang chub kyi phyogs kyi chos ji ltar thob pa de dag la.

n.270

D: ’bad pas yan lag des yongs su rdzogs pa yin yang byang chub kyi phyogs dang
’thun ba’i chos ji ltar thob pa dag gis de la mang du gnas par bya ba dang / snyoms par
’jug pa la sred pa dang / chos la sred pa las sems lhag par btang snyoms su ’jug mi nus
pas. The expression de la mang du gnas par bya ba corresponds to
tadbahulavihārin. Sanskrit: na tu śaknoti yathāpratilabdhair bodhipakṣair dharmais
tadbahulavihārī samāpattidharmatṝṣṇāyāś ca cittam adhyupekṣituṃ (see Matsuda
1995, p. 68). The subject is singular masculine. I used a plural for bodhisattva
in this chapter to avoid the gender issue since bodhisattvas include both
males and females.

n.271

See 8.35.11. Sanskrit has a locative singular: jñeye; see Matsuda 1995, p. 68.

n.272

Sanskrit reads sarvasūkṣāpattidauṣṭhulyamalavigatām (see Matsuda 1995, p. 69).

n.273

Sanskrit has apramāṇajñānāvabhāsena. It seems that jñāna has been translated
by shes pa in D while the more frequent corresponding Tibetan term ye shes is
usually found in F. Sanskrit: apramāṇajñānāvabhāsena sanniśrayatām upādāya
tasya samādhes tasyāś ca śrutadhāraṇyās tṛtīyā bhūmiḥ prabhākarīty ucyate (see
Matsuda 1995, p. 69).

n.274

The Sanskrit fragment (see Matsuda 1995, p. 69) does not contain the
Sanskrit equivalent for me’i ’od, which is most probably agnyarci, as suggested
by Matsuda. In this case, understanding ’od/arci as “flame” makes more
sense. I translated arcibhūtatva as “set ablaze.”

n.275

See 9.3.5.

n.276

chos kyi tshogs; dharmasaṃbhāra. The Sanskrit (see Matsuda 1995, p. 69) differs
from the Tibetan (Go, folio 35.a reads chos kyi tshogs, just like the more recent
witnesses): nabhopamsya dauṣṭhulyakāyasya mahāmeghopamena dharmakāyena
spharanāc chādanatām upadāya daśamī bhūmir dharmameghaty ucyate. The process
described here corresponds to the āśrayaparāvṛtti (i.e., the shift in one’s basis
of existence), which is completed on the eleventh stage.

n.277

I follow Wonch’uk’s ṭīkā (vol. thi, folio 269.a) regarding the meaning of the
analogy with the sky/space ( nam mkha’ lta bu): gnas ngan len gyi lus nam mkha’
lta bu la chos kyi sku yongs su rdzogs pa sprin chen po lta bus khyab cing khebs pas
de’i phyir bcu pa ni chos kyi sprin gyis zhes bya’o zhes bya ba ni bcu pa chos kyi sprin
rnam par bshad pa’o/ /’di ltar bdag dang chos su ’dzin pas yongs su bsgos pa’i sa bon
gang yin pa de ni las su mi rung ba’i phyir gnas ngan len zhes bya’o/ /stong pa nyid
rnam pa gnyis dang / bdag med pa’i don la sgrib pa’i phyir mdo las nam mkha’ lta bu’o
zhes gsungs so/ /sa bcu po de la chos kyi dbyings rnam pa bcu’i chos kyi sku yongs su
rdzogs pa ni sprin chen po dang mtshungs te/ chos kyi dbyings mngon du gyur pa ni

chos kyi sku yongs su rdzogs pa dang / bsgoms pa las byung ba’i chos kyi sku gnas
ngan len nam mkha’ lta bu la khebs pa’i phyir chos kyi sprin zhes bya’o.
n.278

shes bya’i rnam pa thams cad [mkhyen pa]; jñeyasarvākāra[jñatā-] (see Matsuda
1995, p. 69).

n.279

On the opposition between affliction and purification in this sentence, see
Lamotte 1935, pp. 240–41, n. 13.

n.280

On the relation between pratibhāna and dhāraṇī, see Braarvig 1985.

n.281

gang la; yatredānīm (see Matsuda 1995, p. 70).

n.282

The variant reading found in F differs significantly from the Sanskrit edited
by Matsuda in comparison to the Tibetan translation in D. I translated this
passage from the Sanskrit (see Matsuda 1995, p. 70): (āścaryā bhaga)van yāvad
mahānuśaṃsā mahāphalā anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhī yatredānīm evaṃ
ma(hā)saṃmohajālaṃ saṃpracālya mahac ca dauṣṭhulyagahanaṃ samatikramya
bodhisatvā anuttarāṃ samyaksaṃbodhim abhisaṃbudhyaṃte. D: bcom ldan ’das gang
la de ltar/ byang chub sems dpa’ rnams de ltar kun tu rmongs pa’i dra ba chen po rab
tu dral zhing de’i gnas dan len thibs po chen po las yang dag par ’das te/ bla na med pa
yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub mngon par rdzogs par ’tshang rgya ba’i bla na
med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub ji tsam du phan yon che zhing ’bras bu
che ba ni ngo mtshar lags so. F, folio 54.b: bcom ldan ’das ji tsam du bla na med pa
yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub de ’bras bu che zhing legs pa che ba dang / de ltar
gti mug chen po’i dra ba gsal nas ngan len che zhing sdug pa las yang dag par ’das te/
byang chub sems dpa’ rnams bla na med pa yang dag par rdzogs pa’i byang chub
mngon par rdzogs par ’tshang rgya ba ni ngo mtshar che’o.

n.283

D: chos rnam par dag pa dang / ches shin tu rnam par dag pa yin par rig par bya’o;
compare with Kǫ, folio 55.b: ches rnam par dag pa dang / ches shin tu rnam par dag
pa yin par rig par bya’o.

n.284

D: dgos pa med for nirupalepa (see Mvyut 6672)? F, folio 55.b: dgongs pa med pa. D
and Xuanzang’s translation agree:

無緣無待發⼤願⼼ (Cbeta, Taishō 676).

n.285

D: khams, but F, folio 56.b reads mkhas pa.

n.286

D; Kǫ, folio 47.b: khams gya nom pa (syn. khams bzang po), praṇītadhātu(kam) (see
Mvyut 7670),

妙界 (see Yokoyama, Kōitsu, and Takayuki Hirosawa, eds.,

Sanskrit-Tibetan Index for the Yogâcārabhūmi-śāstra, accessed August 29, 2016,
http://www.buddhism-dict.net/cgi-bin/xpr-ddb.pl?
q=%E5%A6%99%E7%95%8C). As a translation for this term, Lamotte (1935,
p. 245) suggests “complexion” and Powers (1995, p. 243) gives

“constituents.” However, F, folio 57.a has dam pa’i dbyings su instead of khams
gya nom pa las. Obermiller (1933, p. 207, n. 3) gives us the context in which gya
nom pa (praṇīta) is usually used: “Emancipation, in the sense that (the
extinction of Phenomenal Existence) represents the state of bliss and purity
(which is completely free from the defiling forces of the Phenomenal
World).” Xuanzang’s translation reads:
in which

亦能獲得上界勝解 (Cbeta, Taishō 676),

上界 refers to the formless and form realms.

chos la nges par rtog pa’i bzod pa; dharmanidhyānakśānti. The term kśānti is used
n.287

here in the sense of “acceptance.” In the Kīṭāgiri sutta (M. I, 480), the phrase
dhammanijjhānakkhanti is glossed in the following way: “Monks, I do not say
that the attainment of gnosis is all at once. Rather, the attainment of gnosis is
after gradual training, gradual action, gradual practice. And how is there the
attainment of gnosis after gradual training, gradual action, gradual practice?
There is the case where, when confidence has arisen, one visits the teacher.
Having visited, one grows close. Having grown close, one lends ear. Having
lent ear, one hears the Dhamma. Having heard the Dhamma, one remembers
it. Remembering, one penetrates the meaning of the teachings. Penetrating
the meaning, one comes to an agreement through pondering the teachings.”
Kathañca bhikkhave anupubbasikkhā anupubbakiriyā anupubbapaṭipadā aññārādhanā
hoti: idha bhikkhave saddhājāto upasaṅkamati, upasaṅkamanto payirupāsati,
payirupāsanto sotaṃ odahati, ohitasoto dhammaṃ suṇāti, sutvā dhammaṃ dhāreti,
dhatānaṃ dhammānaṃ atthaṃ upaparikkhati, atthaṃ upaparikkhato dhammā
nijjhānaṃ khamanti, dhammanijjhānakkhantiyā sati chando jāyati, chandajāto
ussahati, ussahitvā tuleti, tulayitvā padahati, pahitatto samāno kāyena ceva paramaṃ
saccaṃ sacchikaroti, paññāya ca naṃ paṭivijjha passati.” (Translation and citation
are from Punnaji 2017).

造作増⻑; kṛta-upacita.

n.288

byas shing bsags pa;

n.289

rnam grangs is used here as a synonym for thabs.

n.290

Lit., “Likewise, beings who are suffering from being subject to the suffering
resulting from being conditioned cannot be made happy by any method
consisting in merely assisting them with material objects.”

n.291

According to Lamotte and Keenan, this refers to 9.13: “The perfections are
without attachment, disinterested, free from faults, nonconceptual, and
dedication of merit.”

n.292

Translating rnam par dag pa with “purity” does not work here as can be seen
in the case of the following purifications (2–7), which are formulated
according to the exact same lexicographical and syntactical structure as (1).

n.293

shag kyis ’chags; codanā;

諫誨 (see Yokoyama, Kōitsu, and Takayuki Hirosawa,

eds., Sanskrit-Tibetan Index for the Yogâcārabhūmi-śāstra, accessed August 30,
2016, http://www.buddhism-dict.net/cgi-bin/xpr-ddb.pl?
q=%E8%AB%AB%E8%AA%A8). For codanā, see Edgerton 1953, p. 234.
n.294

rigs pa’i gnas lnga po; pañcavidyā. The five sciences are grammar, logic,
philosophy, medicine, and crafts.

n.295

ma ’tshal ba (D), mi zad pa (F); akṣaya.

n.296

D: sar grub pa.

n.297

In D consistently expressed through the term ngo bo nyid, while in F rang
bzhin is used instead.

n.298

D: ngo bo nyid dang bcas pa nyid kyang ci’i slad du mi ’dzin lags. F, folio 62.a: rang
bzhin ma mchis pa’i rnams kyang ci’i slad du mi ’dzin.

n.299

D: spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug nga ni ngo bo nyid kyis ngo bo nyid med pa nyid
’dzin par mi smra mod kyi. Compare with F, folio 62.a: spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug
nga ni rang bzhin med pa nyid la/ rang bzhin med par mi bzhad de; VD, folio 89.a:
spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug nga ni ngo bo nyid med pa nyid kyis ngo bo nyid ’dzin
par mi smra mod kyi; and Xuanzang’s translation:

我終不說以無⾃性性取無⾃性

性 (Cbeta, Taishō 676). The meanings of these translations can be interpreted
as being similar, although their phrasing is quite different.
n.300

nye ba’i pha rol tu phyin pa. The prefix nye ba (for the upasarga upa-) refers here
to proximity, intimacy, and immediacy (as defilements manifest in the
present case). Reading this term as “subsidiary” or “secondary” does not
make sense since the three kinds of transcendence are presented in
increasing order from the lesser to the greater.

n.301

See 9.4.8: “The eighth stage is called Immovable because what lacks
phenomenal appearance is spontaneously accomplished and [the
bodhisattvas] are unshaken by the manifestation of defilements resulting
from phenomenal appearance.” See also 9.5.8.

n.302

F has only two aspects; see F, folio 63.a. Xuanzang’s translation has three:

n.303

For Schmithausen’s translation of 9.29, see Schmithausen 2014, p. 563.

n.304

Regarding the fact some editions have gnyis (“two”) and others gsum

男⼦略有三種 (Cbeta, Taishō 676).

(“three”); see Schmithausen 2014, p. 563, nn. 2311–12.

善

n.305

See 9.28.1–2.

n.306

Could this clause, de las gzhan pa’i yon tan rnams, refer to those who are not
bodhisattvas?

n.307

See the verses below in D: de dag ’gal ba snyam du sems pa na/ /rnam par rmongs
nas blo gros sna tshogs ’gyur.

n.308

See translation of VinSg 16 in Sakuma 1990, p. 202: “Der Dharmakāya der
Tathāgatas ist dadurch charakterisiert, daß die [ihn konstituierende]
‘Umgestaltung der Grundlage’ daraus hervorgegangen ist, daß man die
[Bodhisattva-]Stufen und Vollkommenheiten durch intensive Übung
gemeistert hat.”

n.309

mngon par ’du bya ba med pa; anabhisaṃskāraṇa.

n.310

On vimuktikāya, see Radich 2007, p. 1254ff.

n.311

As with the compound in the opening question above, I read sprul pa’i sku’i
mtshan nyid (nirmāṇakāyalakṣaṇa) as a bahuvrīhi.

n.312

byin gyis brlabs; adhiṣṭhita.

n.313

F, folio 65.a: bstan pa la.

n.314

dmigs pa la nye bar gtod pa.

n.315

D: sems can gnas pa, but F, folio 65.b reads sems gnas pa, which corresponds to
Xuanzang’s translation:

⼼安住事 (Cbeta, Taishō 676).

n.316

mngon du bya ba; sākṣātkāra.

n.317

gsal ba; paṭu (?). See Mvyut 6695: spyod pa mi gsal ba; apaṭupracāraḥ. Another
possibility for gsal ba would be saṃprakhyāna. Edgerton gives as synonym
asaṃmoṣa (“absence of confusion”). As an equivalent for saṃprakhyāna, a
Tibetan synonym of gsal ba is dran pa. See Edgerton 1953, pp. 83 and 576.

n.318

D: bsgom pa las yongs su skyob pa’i sbyor ba gsal ba. Compare with F, folio 66.a:
bsgom pas yongs su skyob pa’i sbyor ba gsal ba.

n.319

pham pa’i gnas lta bu[’i chos]; pārājayikasthānīya[dharmāḥ]. See Edgerton 1953,
p. 342.

n.320

bar du gcod pa’i chos; antarāyikadharmāḥ (see Mvyut 9324).

n.321

See 8.20.2.

n.322

D, folio 50.b: gnas pa. F, folio 67.a: rnam par bzhag pa. They are synonyms for
vyavasthāna.

n.323

See 8.21, in which the exact same enumeration is found. See D, folio 31.b: mgo
gcig tu lan gdab pa dang / rnam par dbye ba dang / dris te lan gdab pa dang / gzhag pa
dang / gsang ba dang.

n.324

’thob pa. Usually “obtainment” or “attainment.”

n.325

D: so so’i shes pa; compare with F, folio 67.a: dam bcas for the Sanskrit pratijñā.
Yoshimizu opts for “objects that are known” (see Yoshimizu 2010, p. 142),
although it is clear that so so’i shes pa is the Literal translation into Tibetan of
pratijñā.

n.326

Yoshimizu 2010, p. 142 reads the correlative/relative sentence (yat …
tat …; … gang dag yin pa de dag …) as meaning “Whatever is…, that is…”
Alternatively, this grammatical construction could be literally translated with
the following syntactic structure: “That which is … is…” While Yoshimizu’s
translation is technically correct, reading gang dag yin pa in the sense of
“whatever” in the present case is unnecessary since this grammatical
structure is usually used to give a definition of a technical term. As a
consequence, we do not need to mirror the Sanskrit correlative/relative
structure in English. The result is a more simple and fluid rendering of the
text.

n.327

In this paragraph, I read the compounds ending with lakṣaṇa as bahuvrīhis.
Yoshimizu translated these compounds as tatpuruṣas. It seems to me that
reading them as bahuvrīhis makes the entire passage much easier to
understand.

n.328

de mngon sum du dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid; tatpratyakṣopalabdhilakṣaṇa (see Mvyut
4405).

n.329

de la gnas pa mngon sum du dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid; tadāśritya
pratyakṣopalabdhilakṣaṇa/tadāśritya āśritapratyakṣopalabdhilakṣaṇa (see Mvyut
4406). See Yoshimizu 2010, p. 144: “the characteristic of the direct cognition
[of something] depending on the [imperceptible object to be inferred].” The
definition of this term reads, according to Yoshimizu, “The characteristic of
the direct cognition [of something] depending on the [imperceptible object
to be inferred consists in] such kinds of direct cognition, through which
something directly not [cognizable] is inferred.”

n.330

rang gi rigs kyi dpe nye bar sbyar ba’i mtshan nyid;
svajātīyadṛṣṭāntopasaṃhāralakṣaṇa (see Mvyut 4407). The term upasaṃhāra means

“establishing,” in the way of the sādhana with respect to the sādhya. It is
therefore also translated into Tibetan as nye bar sgrub, a synonym for nye ba
sbyar ba, which is used for the Sanskrit sādhana too.
n.331

lung shin tu rnam par dag pa gtan la phab bar bstan pa’i mtshan nyid. See Mvyut
4409: lung shin tu rnam par dag pas gtan la bab par bstan pa’i mtshan nyid/ lung shin
tu rnam par dag pas gtan la dbab par bstan pa’i mtshan nyid;
suviśuddhāgamopadeśalakṣaṇa.

n.332

For the sake of readability, I inverted the order of the clauses in the
sentences explaining the five points mentioned here. If we translate the
Tibetan literally, the pattern would be: [example 1, example 2, etc.] are [the
logical proof to be defined].

n.333

D: gang gis mngon sum du ma gyur pa la rjes su dpag par bya ba dang / de lta bu dang
’thun pa gang yin pa de ni de la gnas pa mngon sum du dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid yin
no. Yoshimizu’s translation of this clause seems incorrect: “The characteristic
of the direct cognition [of something] depending on the [imperceptible
object to be inferred consists in] such kinds of direct cognition, through
which something directly not [cognizable] is inferred, as…” followed by
sentences (1), (2), and (3).

n.334

In this explanation of tadāśritya pratyakṣopalabdhilakṣaṇam, I do not understand
why Yoshimizu takes elements of sentence (1) into sentence (2), in violation
of the Tibetan syntax which is quite clear in the present case. See Yoshimizu
2010, p. 144.

n.335

Yoshimizu adds the concept of vipraṇa to this sentence, which is not found in
the Tibetan. See Yoshimizu 2010, p. 145.

n.336

The analogies given as examples seem to be instances of [para]prasiddhānumāṇa ([tha snyad du gzhan la] grags pa’i rjes dpag) in that the perception of the
analogy must be renowned (grags pa) in the world (or established from the
perspective of the person to be persuaded), thereby offering a certain level of
consensus, which is essential for the validity of this kind of logical proof.

n.337

This probably refers to the various kinds of suffering, which includes the
suffering inherent to the conditioned phenomena as well as to the twelve
factors of conditioned existence.

n.338

rang dbang med pa; asvatantra.

n.339

Yoshimizu segments this passage in a different way (see Yoshimizu 2010,
p. 145), as it appears that she did not understand its syntactic structure (or

chose not to follow it). The point of these instances in the form of established
perceptions for which there is a consensus is to show how one thing (that
which must be established) is established from the other (the commonly
established perception). The relation here is again of the type sādhya/sādhana,
this time through an instance belonging to the same class of phenomena. In
these sentences, we have the following construction: X la Y dmigs pa nye bar
sbyar ba. In the present case, X (i.e., external and internal conditioned
phenomena) is the sādhya, and Y is the sādhana (i.e., clauses 1–2), which makes
the svajātīyadṛṣṭāntopasaṃhāralakṣaṇam look like a type of prasiddhānumāṇa.
n.340

These three proofs are (A) a perception that is a direct cognition of the [thing
to establish]; (B) a perception that is a direct cognition [of something
existing] in dependence on the [thing to establish]; and (C) a demonstration
through an instance belonging to the same class.

n.341

See beginning of 10.7.4 above. Yoshimizu translates rigs pa brtag pa yongs su
dag pa with “the reasoning to be investigated.” See Yoshimizu 2010, p. 145.

n.342

dge sbyong bzhi for dge sbyong chos bzhi; see Mvyut 8708: dge sbyong du byed pa’i
chos bzhi ming la; catvārah śramaṇakārakadharmāḥ.

n.343

This passage is interesting because the five defining characteristics of the
principle of reason are reduced to three core ideas. Since pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa
merely refers to the definition of correct reasoning with regard to the other
four defining characteristics, it is understandable that it is not included in
this list. However, it is fascinating to see that svajātīyadṛṣṭāntopasaṃhāralakṣaṇa
is also excluded here, which might confirm that this proof was considered to
be a form of prasiddhānumāṇa in spite of its seemingly inductive character
resulting from the use of instances or examples upon which there is a
consensus. However, the “engine” of the proof in the case of this valid
cognition is not an induction but the deduction ensuing from facts that are
accepted as conventions by virtue of consensus. As a consequence, one
could argue that the svajātīyadṛṣṭāntopasaṃhāralakṣaṇa has a monotonic aspect
explaining why it is not inductive in spite of its empirical aspect. The
analogies used in this kind of reasoning are, in a way, carved in marble, in
the sense of well-established principles that cannot be refuted by new
information drawn from further experience or perception, which is precisely
the reason why these reasonings have the capacity to establish the sādhya.
They are by nature a deduction from a universal law or principle. Hence their
possible inclusion in the category of anumāṇa as prasiddhānumāṇa since they
surely do not correspond only to a direct cognition.

n.344

de las gzhan dang ’thun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid. See Mvyut 4410: de las gzhan
dang mthun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid/ de las gzhan dang mthun par mngon sum
du dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid; tadanyasārūpyopalabdhilakṣaṇa.

n.345

de la gzhan dang mi ’thun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid. See Mvyut 4411: de las gzhan
dang mi mthun pa mngon sum du dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid/ de las gzhan dang mi
mthun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid/ de las gzhan dang mi mthun par mngon sum du
dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid; tadanyavairūpyopalabdhilakṣaṇa.

n.346

thams cad ’thun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid. See Mvyut 4412: thams cad mthun par
dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid; sarvasārūpyopalabdhilakṣaṇa.

n.347

thams cad mi ’thun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid. See Mvyut 4413: thams cad mi
mthun par dmigs pa’i mtshan nyid; sarvavairūpyopalabdhilakṣaṇa.

n.348

gzhan gyi rigs kyi dpe nye bar sbyar ba’i mtshan nyid. See Mvyut 4414: gzhan gyi
rigs kyi dpe nye bar sbyar ba’i mtshan nyid; anyajātīyadṛṣṭāntopasaṃhāralakṣaṇa.

n.349

This refers to point (IV) above.

n.350

For an examination of similarities between Saṃdh. and Hetuvidyā, see
Yoshimizu 2010.

n.351

This refers to point (IV) above.

n.352

This refers to point (I) above.

n.353

This point is not easy to unravel. I understand it in the following way. If the
perception [of a logical proof] that does not conform with any[thing] could
be used to establish the thesis, it also could be used to establish as well
something that is not the thesis. As a consequence, it would be included in
the reasons proving that which is not the thesis and would be therefore
inconclusive. In other words, the perception of the proof would be present in
both the sapakṣa and the vipakṣa. The proof of something that does not
conform to anything would be necessarily also found in the perception of
that which does not conform with that which must be established. As one
proceeds to examine the proof, its absence of conformity with the premise is
enough to disqualify it, whether it is conforming with something other than
the premise or with nothing else.

n.354

This refers to point (VI) above.

n.355

This refers to point (III) above.

n.356

This refers to point (II) above.

n.357

This point is also not easy to understand. I take it to mean the following: if a
perception that conforms with all [things] (i.e., with anything) demonstrates
the thesis, it follows that the dharmin/pakṣa (all phenomena) constitutes the
entire sapakṣa and there is not even the possibility of having a vipakṣa. The
demonstration based on such perceptions is therefore inconclusive because
it represents a tautology based on a circular argument that nothing could
invalidate in the absence of a sapakṣa and a vipakṣa.

n.358

“Whether tathāgatas…”; see also 4.10 and 7.9. This quote is found in various
other canonical scriptures with minor variations.

n.359

F, folio 69.b: ye shes.

n.360

ldem por dgongs pa.

n.361

I read kun nas nyon mongs pa’i chos and rnam par byang ba’i chos as bahuvrīhis.

n.362

The verses might have been corrupted. The prose section (D, folio 53.a)
reads, ’jam dpal kun nas nyon mongs pa’i chos gang dag yin pa dang / rnam par
byang ba’i chos gang dag yin pa de dag thams cad ni g.yo ba med pa gang zag med pa
yin te/ de’i phyir ngas chos rnams rnam pa thams cad du byed pa med par bstan to,
which does not match the variant reading found in the verses (D, folio 53.b):
kun nas nyon mongs chos dang rnam par byang ba’i chos/ /thams cad byed pa med
cing gang zag med pa yin/ /de phyir de dag byed pa med par ngas bshad do.

n.363

10.8 before the gāthās, in which the dhāraṇī is given, could be seen as a mchan
’grel of these verses (i.e., a ‘fill-in commentary’).

n.364

See 5.1–6.

n.365

sprul pa; nirmāṇa. From the Sanskrit point of view, the juxtaposition of
anabhisaṃskāra and nirmāṇa must have created a cognitive dissonance as it
represents a paradox that can only be solved through the notion of
nonduality, the topic of the next paragraph. The term anabhisaṃskāra
expresses the notion of something that is uncreated, not brought about, and
not the result of any conditioning process — something uncontrived,
effortless, spontaneous. In contrast, nirmāṇa implies creation, construction,
emanation, formation, composition, and transformation. A solution to this
quandary that would not invoke nonduality is to understand the term
anabhisaṃskāra as stressing primarily the idea of effortlessness as in the
example of the dream given by the Buddha below. Another interpretation
could be the apparition in a mirror. A reflection may seem real but is actually
neither going nor coming anywhere. It is unproduced and nonexistent, not
even “a thing.”

n.366

The question is to determine how the arising of anything is possible on the
level of the relative truth in the absence of a causal process.

n.367

D: ’jam dpal sems yod pa yang ma yin/ sems med pa yang ma yin te/ sems rang dbang
med pa nyid dang / sems kyi dbang nyid yin pa’i phyir ro.

n.368

yul; viṣaya.

n.369

See 8.23.

n.370

Advayalakṣaṇa can be read in various ways: (1) as a genitive tatpuruṣa: “the
defining characteristic of the nondual/of nonduality”; (2) as a karmadhāraya:
“the nondual defining characteristic”; or (3) as a bahuvrīhi (which occurs
frequently with lakṣaṇa as the second member of the compound): “who has
the defining characteristic of nonduality/the nondual defining
characteristic” or “who is characterized by nonduality.” On the basis of the
question and the first part of the answer (D: bcom ldan ’das de bzhin gshegs pa’i
mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa gang lags pa dang / chos kyi ’khor lo bskor ba
gang lags pa dang / yongs su mya ngan las ’das pa chen po gang lags pa de dag gi
mtshan nyid ni/ ji lta bur rig par bgyi lags/ ’jam dpal gnyis su med pa’i mtshan nyid
yin te), I would tend to read the compound as a genitive tatpuruṣa:
“Mañjuśrī, [you should understand it] as the defining characteristic of
nonduality.” However, the following sentences in the answer are built with
the verb yin, implying a series of expressions referring to the tathāgatas
through the use of nominalized verbal adjectives such as byang chub pa
(bodha) or bskor ba; see D, folio 54.a–b: mngon par rdzogs par byang chub pa yang
ma yin/ mngon par rdzogs par byang ma chub pa yang ma yin/ chos kyi ’khor lo bskor
ba yang ma yin/ chos kyi ’khor lo mi bskor ba yang ma yin/ yongs su mya ngan las ’das
pa chen po yang ma yin/ yongs su mya ngan las ’das pa chen po med pa yang ma yin
te/ chos kyi sku shin tu rnam par dag pa nyid kyi phyir dang / sprul pa’i sku kun tu
ston pa nyid kyi phyir ro. Lamotte translated the passage into French according
to the structure defined by “il n’y a pas,” which would correspond to the
verb yod in Tibetan, not yin. As a consequence, I chose to translate
advayalakṣaṇa as a bahuv rīhi qualifying the tathāgatas.

b.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
· Tibetan Sources ·
’phags pa dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo (Āryasaṃdhinirmocananāmamahāyānasūtra). Toh 106, Degé Kangyur vol. 49 (mdo sde, ca)
folios 1.b–55.b.
’phags pa dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo. bka’ ’gyur
(dpe bsdur ma) [Comparative Edition of the Kangyur], krung go’i bod rig
pa zhib ’jug ste gnas kyi bka’ bstan dpe sdur khang (The Tibetan Tripitaka
Collation Bureau of the China Tibetology Research Center). 108 volumes.
Beijing: krung go’i bod rig pa dpe skrun khang (China Tibetology
Publishing House), 2006–9, vol. 49, pp. 3–131.
Asaṅga. rnal ’byor spyod pa’i sa (Yogācārabhūmi). Toh 4035, Degé Tengyur vol.
127 (sems tsam, tshi) folios 1.b–283.a
Asaṅga. rnal ’byor spyod pa’i sa rnam par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba (Yogācārabhūmiviniścayasaṃgraha). Toh 4038, Degé Tengyur vol. 130 (sems tsam, zhi),
folios 1.b–289.a; vol. 131 (sems tsam, zi), folios 1.b–127.a.
Buddhabhūmisūtra (sangs rgyas kyi sa’i mdo). Toh 275, Degé Kangyur vol. 68
(mdo sde, ya), folios 36.a–44.b.
Kamalaśila. bsgom pa’i rim pa (Bhāvanākrama). Toh 3915, Degé Tengyur vol. 110
(dbu ma, ki), folios 22.a–41.b; Toh 3916, Degé Tengyur vol. 110 (dbu ma, ki),
folios 42.a–55.b; and Toh 3917, Degé Tengyur vol. 110 (dbu ma, ki), folios
55.b–68.b.
Mahāvyutpatti (bye brag tu rtogs par byed pa chen po). Toh 4346, Degé Tengyur
vol. 204 (sna tshogs, co), folios 1.b–131.a.
Māyājāla (mdo chen sgyu ma’i dra ba). Toh 288, Degé Kangyur vol. 71 (mdo sde,
sha), folios 230.a–244.a. English translation The Mahāsūtra “Illusion’s Net”
(https://read.84000.co/translation/toh288.html) 2025.

Tathāgataguṇajñānācintyaviṣayāvatāranirdeśasūtra
(https://read.84000.co/translation/toh185.html) (de bzhin gshegs pa’i yon tan dang
ye shes bsam gyis mi khyab pa’i yul la ’jug pa bstan pa’i mdo). Toh 185, Degé
Kangyur vol. 61 (mdo sde, tsa), folios 106.a–143.b.
Trisong Detsen (khri srong lde brtsan). bka’ yang dag pa’i tshad ma las mdo btus pa
(Samyagvākpramāṇoddhṛtasūtra). Toh 4352, Degé Tengyur vol. 204 (sna
tshogs, co), folios 173.b–203.a.
Vasubandhu. dbus dang mtha’ rnam par ’byed pa’i ’grel pa (Madhyāntavibhāgabhāṣya). Toh 4027, Degé Tengyur vol. 124 (sems tsam, bi), folios 1.b–27.a.
Wonch’uk. dgongs pa zab mo nges par ’grel pa’i mdo rgya cher ’grel pa (*Āryagambhīrasaṃdhinirmocanasūtraṭīkā) Toh 4016, Degé Tengyur vol. 118 (mdo
’grel, ti), folios 1.b–291.a; vol. 119 (mdo ’grel, thi), folios 1.b–175.a.
IOL Tib J 194 (http://idp.bl.uk/database/oo_loader.a4d?
pm=IOL%20Tib%20J%20194;img=1). British Library, London. Accessed
through The International Dunhuang Project: The Silk Road Online.
· · Other Canonical Sources for Samdh. · ·
Bd3.7 vol. 3 (ta) pha, folios 1.b–84.a
C747 vol. 29 (mdo sde, ca), folios 1.b–71.a
Dd031-001 (mdo ca), folios 1.b–69.b
Dk034-001 (mdo na), folios 1.b–87.b
Do (mdo sde, da), folios 196.a–246.b
F156 vol. 68 (mdo sde, tsha), folios 1.b–72.a
Go19,01 vol. 19 (ka), folios 1.b–36.a
Gt028-001 (mdo na), folios 1.b–72.b
H109 vol. 51 (mdo sde, ca), folios 1.b–87.b
He64.6 (mdo, wa), folios 62.b–125.b
J51 vol. 44 (mdo sde, ca), folios 1.b–59.b
Kǫ774 vol. 29 (mdo sna tshogs, ngu), folios 1.b–60.b
L82 vol. 42 (mdo sde, na), folios 1.b–80.b
N94 vol. 51 (mdo sde, ca) folios 1.a–81.a.
Np012-001 (mdo na), folios 1.b–87.a
Pj043-001 (mdo ca), folios 1.b–62.b
Pz045-001 (mdo ca), folios 1.b–61.a

R106 vol. 49 (mdo sde, ca), folios 1.b–55.b
S106 vol. 63 (mdo sde, na), folios 1.b–80.b
U106 vol. 49 (mdo sde, ca), folios 1.b–55.b
X (mdo sde, wa), folios 66.a–132.a
Z137 vol. 59 (mdo, na), folios 1.b–93.a

· Other Sources ·
84000. The Mahāsūtra “Illusion’s Net”
(https://read.84000.co/translation/toh288.html) (Māyājālamahāsūtra, mdo chen
sgyu ma’i dra ba, Toh 288). Translated by Dharmachakra Translation
Committee. Online publication, 84000: Translating the Words of the
Buddha, 2025.
Bhattacharya, Ramkrishna. “Uttarakuru: The (E)utopia of Ancient India.”
Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 81, no. 1/4 (2000): 191–201.
Billeter, Jean-François. Trois essais sur la traduction. Paris: Allia, 2014.
Braarvig, Jens. “Dhāraṇī and Pratibhāna: Memory and Eloquence of the
Bodhisattvas.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 8, no.
1 (1985): 17–30.
Brunnhölzl, Karl. A Compendium of the Mahāyāna: Asaṅga’s “Mahāyānasaṃgraha”
and Its Indian and Tibetan Commentaries. 3 vols. Boulder: Shambhala, 2018.
Buescher, Hartmut (2007). Sthiramati’s Triṃśikāvijñaptibhāṣya: Critical Editions of
the Sanskrit Text and its Tibetan Translation. Vienna: Verlag der
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenachaften, 2007.
Buescher, Hartmut (2008). The Inception of Yogācāra-Vijñānavāda. Vienna: Verlag
der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2008.
Buswell, Robert E., Donald S. Lopez, and Juhn Ahn. The Princeton Dictionary of
Buddhism. Princeton University Press, 2014.
Chayet, Anne. “Pour servir à la numérisation des manuscrits tibétains de
Dunhuang conservés à la Bibliothèque Nationale : un fichier de Jacques
Bacot et autres documents.” Revue d’Etudes Tibétaines 9 (2005): 4–107.
Cleary, Thomas F. Buddhist Yoga: A Comprehensive Course. Boston: Shambhala,
1999.
Conze, Edward. The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom: With the Divisions of the
Abhisamayālaṅkāra. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975.
Cornu, Philippe. Soûtra du dévoilement du sens profond. Paris: Fayard, 2005.

Rhys Davids, T. W., and William Stede. The Pali Text Society’s Pali-English
Dictionary. Chipstead: The Pali Text Society, 1921.
Dayal, Har. The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhist Sanskrit Literature. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 2004.
Delhey, Martin. “The Yogācārabhūmi Corpus: Sources, Editions, Translations,
and Reference Works.” In The Foundation for Yoga Practitioners. The Buddhist
Yogācārabhūmi Treatise and Its Adaptation in India, East Asia, and Tibet, edited by
Ulrich Timme Krag, 498–561. Harvard Oriental Series 75. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 2013.
Eckel, Malcolm David. To See the Buddha: A Philosopher’s Quest for the Meaning of
Emptiness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.
Edgerton, Franklin (1937). “Buddhist Sanskrit saṃdha, saṃdhi(-nirmocana).”
Journal of the American Oriental Society 5, vol. 2 (1937): 185–88.
Edgerton, Franklin (1953). Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary.
Vol. 2, Dictionary. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1953.
Fiordalis, David V. “The Wondrous Display of Superhuman Power in the
Vimalakīrtinirdeśa: Miracle or Marvel?” In Yoga Powers: Extraordinary Capacities
Attained Through Meditation and Concentration, edited by Knut Axel Jacobsen,
96–125. Leiden: Brill, 2012.
Frauwallner, Erich. Die Philosophie des Buddhismus. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag,
1969.
Gómez, Luis O. “On Buddhist wonders and wonder-working.” Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies 33, no. 1–2 (2011): 513–54.
Hall, Bruce Cameron. “The Meaning of Vijñapti in Vasubandhu’s Concept of
Mind.” Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 9, no. 1 (1986):
7–23.
Hakayama, Noriaki (1984). “The Old and New Tibetan Translationsof the
Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra: Some Notes on the History of Early Tibetan
Translation.” In Komazawa daigaku bukkyōgakubu kenkyū kiyō 42, 192–176,
1984.
Hakayama, Noriaki (1986). “A Comparative Edition of the Old and New
Tibetan Translations of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra (I).” In Komazawa
daigaku bukkyōgakubu ronshū 17, 616(1)–600(17), 1986.
Hakayama, Noriaki (1987a). “A Comparative Edition of the Old and New
Tibetan Translations of the Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra (II).” In Komazawa
daigaku bukkyōgakubu kenkyū kiyō 45, 354(1)–320(35), 1987.

Hakayama, Noriaki (1987b). “A Comparative Edition of the Old and New
Tibetan Translations of the Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra (III).” In Komazawa
daigaku bukkyōgakubu ronshū 18, 606(1)–572(35), 1986.
Hopkins, Jeffrey (1999). Emptiness in the Mind-Only School of Buddhism.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
Hopkins, Jeffrey (2002). Reflections on Reality: The Three Natures and Non-Natures
in the Mind-Only School. Dynamic Responses to D̄zong-ka-b̄a’s “The
Essence of Eloquence” 2. London: University of California Press, 2002.
Hopkins, Jeffrey (2006). Absorption in No External World: 170 Issues in Mind Only
Buddhism. Dynamic Responses to D̄zong-ka-b̄a’s “The Essence of
Eloquence” 3. Ithaca: Snow Lion, 2006.
Kapstein, Matthew (1988). “Mi-pham’s Theory of Interpretation.” In Buddhist
Hermeneutics edited by Donald Lopez. Honolulu: University of Hawai’i
Press, 1988: 149–174
Kapstein, Matthew (2001). Reason’s Traces: Identity and Interpretation in Indian
and Tibetan Buddhist Thought. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2001.
Katō, Kojirō (2002). “Pratibimba in the Context of Vijñaptimātra Theory: A
Comparative Study of the Śrāvakabhūmi and the Sandhinirmocanasūtra (Chap.
VI).” In Studies in Indian Philosophy and Buddhism, 53–65. Tokyo: Tokyo
University, 2002.
Katō, Kojirō (2004). “On the Terms vijñaptimatratā and vijñaptitathatā as
Found in the Sandhinirmocanasūtra.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies
(=Indobukkyogaku Kenkyu) 52, no. 2 (2004): 38–40.
Katō, Kojirō (2006). “On the Tibetan Text of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra:
Towards a Comparative Study of Manuscripts and Editions which belong
to the East and West Recensions.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies
(=Indobukkyogaku Kenkyu) 54, no. 3 (2006): 1205–11.
Katō, Kojirō (2011). “On the Two Different Interpretations of
paramārthaniḥsvabhāva in the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra 7.6.” Journal of Indian and
Buddhist Studies (=Indobukkyogaku Kenkyu) 59, no. 2 (2011): 976–81.
Katō, Kojirō (forthcoming). Critical edition of the Sandhinirmocanasūtra. PhD
diss., University of Tokyo.
Kawasaki, Shinjo. “Analysis of yoga in the Sandhinirmocanasūtra.” Buzan
Gakuho 21 (1976): 170–156.
Keenan, John Peter (1980). “A Study of the Buddhabhūmyupadeśa: The
Doctrinal Development of the Notion of Wisdom in Yogācāra Thought.”
PhD diss., University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1980.

Keenan, John Peter (2000). The Scripture on the Explication of Underlying
Meaning: Translated from the Chinese of Hsüan-tsang. BDK English Tripiṭaka
25-4. Berkeley: Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research,
2000.
Kritzer, Robert. “Rūpa and the Antarābhava.” Journal of Indian Philosophy 29
(2000): 235–72.
Lamotte, Étienne (1935). Saṃdhinirmocana sūtra: l’explication des mystères.
Louvain: Bureaux du recueil, Bibliothèque de l’Universit́e , 1935.
Lamotte, Étienne (1973). La somme du grand véhicule d’Asaṅga:
Mahāyānasaṃgraha. Louvain: Université de Louvain, Institut orientaliste,
1973.
Lamotte, Étienne (1970). Le traité de la grande vertu de sagesse de Nāgārjuna,
Mahāprajñāpāramitāśāstra. Louvain: Université de Louvain, Institut
orientaliste, 1970.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de (1925). L’Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu. Paris: P.
Geuthner, 1925.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de (1934–35). “Notes Bouddhiques：XX. Les Trois
‘Caractères’ et les trois ‘Absences de Nature Propre’ dans le
Samdhinirmocana, Chapitres VI et VII.” Bulletin de la Classe des Lettres et des
Sciences Morales et Politiques, Académie Royale de Belgique (1934–35): 284–303.
Lévi, Sylvain. Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi: deux traités de Vasubandhu : Viṁśatikā (La
vingtaine) accompagnée d’une explication en prose, et Triṁśikā (La trentaine) avec
le commentaire de Sthiramati. Paris: H. Champion, 1925.
Lin, Chen Kuo (1991). The Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra: A Liberating Hermeneutic.
PhD diss., Temple University, 1991.
Lin, Chen Kuo (2010). “Truth and method in the Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra.”
Journal of Chinese Philosophy 37 (2010): 261–75.
Lusthaus, Dan. Buddhist Phenomenology: A Philosophical Investigation of Yogācāra
Buddhism and the “Ch’eng Wei-shih lun.” London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2002.
Mathes, Klaus-Dieter. “The Ontological Status of the Dependent (paratantra)
in the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra and the Vyākhyāyukti.” In Indica et Tibetica:
Festschrift für Michael Hahn, edited by Konrad Klaus and Jens-Uwe
Hartmann, 323–39. Vienna: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische
Studien Universität Wien, 2007.
Matsuda, Kazunobu (1995). “Sanskrit Text of the Bodhisattva’s Ten Stages in
the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra: Based on the Kathmandu Fragment of the
Yogācārabhūmi.” Bulletin of the Research Institute of Bukkyō University 2

(1995): 59–77.
Matsuda, Kazunobu (2013). “Sanskrit Fragments of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra.” In The Foundation for Yoga Practitioners: The Buddhist Yogācārabhūmi
Treatise and Its Adaptation in India, East Asia, and Tibet, edited by Ulrich Timme
Krag, 772–90. Harvard Oriental Series 75. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2013.
Muller, Charles A. “Woncheuk

圓測 on Bimba 本質 and Pratibimba 影像 in his

Commentary on the Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist
Studies 59, no. 3 (2011): 1272–80.
Nagao, Gadjin. Madhyāntavibhāga‐bhāṣya: a Buddhist Philosophical Treatise Edited
for the First Time from a Sanskrit Manuscript. Tokyo: Suzuki Research
Foundation. 1964.
Nance, Richard F. Speaking for Buddhas: Scriptural Commentary in Indian
Buddhism. New York: Columbia University Press, 2012.
Obermiller, Eugéne. Analysis of the Abhisamayālaṃkāra. London: Luzac, 1933.
Powers, John (1991a). “The Term ‘Saṃdhinirmocana’ in the Title of the
Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra.” Studies in Central and East Asian Religions 4 (1991):
52–62.
Powers, John (1991b). “The Concept of the Ultimate (don dam pa, paramārtha)
in the Sandhinirmocanasūtra.” Indian Journal of Buddhist Studies 3, no. 1 (1991):
1–24.
Powers, John (1991c). “The Concept of the Ultimate (don dam pa,
paramārtha) in the Sandhinirmocana-Sūtra: Analysis, translation, and
notes.” PhD diss., University of Virginia, 1991.
Powers, John (1992a). “Lost in China, Found in Tibet: How Wonch’uk
Became the Author of the Great Chinese Commentary.” In Journal of the
International Association of Buddhist Studies 15, no. 1 (1992): 95–103.
Powers, John (1992b). Two Commentaries on the Samdhinirmocana-Sutra by
Asanga and Jnanagarbha. Studies in Asian Thought and Religion 13.
Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press, 1992.
Powers, John (1993a). “The Tibetan Translations of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra
and Bka’ ’gyur Research.” Central Asiatic Journal 37, no. 3/4 (1993): 198–224.
Powers, John (1993b). Hermeneutics and Tradition in the Sandhinirmocana-sūtra.
Leiden: Brill, 1993.
Powers, John (1995). Wisdom of Buddha: The Saṁdhinirmocana Sūtra. Tibetan
Translation Series 16. Berkeley: Dharma Publishing, 1995.

Powers, John (1998). Jñānagarbha’s Commentary on Just the Maitreya Chapter from
the Saṃdhinirmocana-Sūtra: Study, Translation and Tibetan Text. New Delhi:
Indian Council of Philosophical Research, 1998.
Powers, John (2015). “Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra.”In Brill’s Encyclopedia of
Buddhism, edited by Jonathan Silk et al., vol. 1, Literature and Languages, 240–
48. Leiden: Brill, 2015.
Punnaji, Hingulwala. “A Study of the Practice of Recollections (Anussati) in
Buddhist Meditation.” PhD diss., Huafan University.
Radich, Michael. “The Somatics of Liberation: Ideas about Embodiment in
Buddhism from Its Origins to the Fifth Century C.E.” PhD Diss., Harvard
University: 2007.
Rahula, Walpola. Abhidharmasamuccaya: The Compendium of Higher Teaching
(philosophy) by Asanga. Fremont: Asian Humanities Press, 2001.
Sakuma, Hidenori S. Die āśrayaparivṛtti-Theorie in der Yogācārabhūmi. 2 vols.
Stuttgart: Steiner, 1990.
Schmithausen, Lambert (1984). “On the Vijñaptimātra Passage in
Saṁdhinirmocanasūtra VIII.7.” Acta Indologica 6 (1984): 433–55.
Schmithausen, Lambert (1987). Ālayavijñāna: On the Origin and the Early
Development of a Central Concept of Yogācāra Philosophy. Tokyo: International
Institute for Buddhist Studies, 1987.
Schmithausen, Lambert (2005). On the Problem of the External World in the
“Ch’eng wei shih lun.” Studia Philologica Buddhica. Tokyo: The
International Institute for Buddhist Studies, 2005.
Schmithausen, Lambert (2014). The Genesis of Yogācāra-Vijñānavāda: Responses
and Reflections. Kasuga Lectures Series 1. Tokyo: The International Institute
for Buddhist Studies, 2014.
Skilling, Peter (1994). “Kanjur Titles and Colophons.” In Tibetan Studies:
Proceedings of the 6th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies,
Fagernes 1992, edited by Per Kvaerne, 2:768–80. Oslo: The Institute for
Comparative Research in Human Culture, 1994.
Skilling, Peter (2013). “Nets of Intertextuality: Embedded Scriptural Citations
in the Yogācārabhūmi.” In The Foundation for Yoga Practitioners: The Buddhist
“Yogācārabhūmi” Treatise and Its Adaptation in India, East Asia, and Tibet, edited
by Ulrich Timme Kragh, 772–90. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2013.

Steinkellner, Ernst. “Who is Byaṅ chub rdzu ’phrul? Tibetan and non-Tibetan
Commentaries on the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra – A Survey of the Literature.”
Berliner Indologische Studien 4/5 (1989): 229–52.
Takahashi, Kōichi. “A Premise of the trilakṣaṇa theory in the
Sandhinirmocanasūtra.” In Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies
(=Indobukkyogaku Kenkyu) 54, no. 3 (2006): 85–92.
Takasaki, Jikido. A Study on the Ratnagotravibhāga (Uttaratantra): Being a Treatise
on the Tathāgatagarbha Theory of Mahāyāna Buddhism. Serie Orientale Roma 32.
Roma: Istituto italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1966.
Tillemans, Tom J. F. “On a recent translation of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra.” In
Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 20, no. 1 (1997): 153–
64.
Tucci, Giuseppe. Minor Buddhist Texts Part III: Third Bhāvanākrama. Serie
Orientale Roma 43. Roma: Istituto italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente,
1971.
Vinay, Jean-Paul, and Jean Darbelnet. Comparative Stylistics of French and
English: A Methodology for Translation. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1958.
Waldron, William S. The Buddhist Unconscious: The ālaya-vijñāna in the context of
Indian Buddhist Thought. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.
Ware, James. Review of Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra, l’explication des mystères, by
Étienne Lamotte. Journal of the American Oriental Society 57, no. 1 (1937): 122–
24.
Wayman, Alex. “The Mirror as a Pan-Buddhist Metaphor-Simile.” History of
Religions 13, no. 4 (1974): 251–69.
Wedemeyer, Christian K. “Review of Jñānagarbha’s Commentary on Just the
Maitreya Chapter from the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra: Study, Translation and Tibetan
Text, by John Powers.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 123, no. 3
(2003): 681–84.
Xing, Guang. The Concept of the Buddha: Its evolution from early Buddhism to the
“trikāya” theory. RoutledgeCurzon Critical Studies in Buddhism. London:
RoutledgeCurzon, 2005.
Yoshimizu, Chizuko (1996). “On the Four Kinds of yukti in the Tenth Chapter
of the Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra.” Journal of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies
19 (1996): 123–68.
Yoshimizu, Chizuko (2010). “The Logic of the Sandhinirmocanasūtra:
Establishing Right Reasoning Based on Similarity (sārūpya) and
Dissimilarity (vairūpya).” In Logic in Earliest Classical India, edited by

Brendan S. Gillon, 139–66. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 2010.

g.

GLOSSARY
· Types of attestation for names and terms of the corresponding ·

source language
AS

Attested in source text
This term is attested in a manuscript used as a source for this translation.

AO

Attested in other text
This term is attested in other manuscripts with a parallel or similar context.

AD

Attested in dictionary
This term is attested in dictionaries matching Tibetan to the corresponding
language.

AA

Approximate attestation
The attestation of this name is approximate. It is based on other names
where the relationship between the Tibetan and source language is attested
in dictionaries or other manuscripts.

RP

Reconstruction from Tibetan phonetic rendering
This term is a reconstruction based on the Tibetan phonetic rendering of the
term.

RS

Reconstruction from Tibetan semantic rendering
This term is a reconstruction based on the semantics of the Tibetan
translation.

SU

Source unspecified
This term has been supplied from an unspecified source, which most often
is a widely trusted dictionary.

g.1

abiding in phenomena
chos gnas pa nyid

ས་གནས་པ་ད།
dharmasthititā
g.2

absorption

snyoms par ’jug pa

མས་པར་འག་པ།
samāpatti
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The Sanskrit literally means “attainment,” and is used to refer specifically to
meditative attainment and to particular meditative states. The Tibetan
translators interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which suggests the idea of “equal” or
“level”; however, they also parsed it as sam-āpatti, in which case it would
have the sense of “concentration” or “absorption,” much like samādhi, but
with the added sense of “attainment.”
g.3

absorption in the state of cessation
’gog pa la snyoms par zhugs pa

འག་པ་ལ་མས་པར་གས་པ།
nirodhasamāpatti
See Mvyut 1500 and 1988.
g.4

accept
len

ན།
ādadante
cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.40.
g.5

acceptance that phenomena are non-arisen
mi skye ba’i chos la bzod pa

་་བ་ས་ལ་བད་པ།
anutpattidharmakṣānti
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The bodhisattvas’ realization that all phenomena are unproduced and empty.
It sustains them on the difficult path of benefiting all beings so that they do
not succumb to the goal of personal liberation. Different sources link this
realization to the first or eighth bodhisattva level (bhūmi).
g.6

accomplishment of the goal
dgos pa yongs su grub pa

དས་པ་ངས་་བ་པ།
kṛtyānuṣṭhāna

g.7

accumulated
kun tu bsags pa

ན་་བསགས་པ།
ācita
g.8

accused
shag kyis ’chags

ཤག་ས་འཆགས།
codanā
g.9

activity of conditioning mental factors
’du byed kyi ’jug pa

འ་ད་་འག་པ།
saṃskārapravṛtti
g.10

actual
yongs su grub pa

ངས་་བ་པ།
pariniṣpanna
See n.125.
g.11

actual defining characteristic
yongs su grub pa’i mtshan nyid

ངས་་བ་པ་མཚན་ད།
pariniṣpannalakṣaṇa
g.12

actual essence
yongs su grub pa’i ngo bo nyid · yongs su grub pa’i rang bzhin

ངས་་བ་པ་་་ད། · ངས་་བ་པ་རང་བན།
pariniṣpannasvabhāva
g.13

actualization
mngon du bya ba

མན་་་བ།
sākṣātkāra
g.14

actually refer to

mngon par rjod pas rjod pa

མན་པར་ད་པས་ད་པ།
abhivadamānā · abhivadanti
Mahāvyutpatti 1290.
g.15

affliction
kun nas nyon mongs pa

ན་ནས་ན་ངས་པ།
saṃkleśa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
A term meaning defilement, impurity, and pollution, broadly referring to
cognitive and emotional factors that disturb and obscure the mind. As the
self-perpetuating process of affliction in the minds of beings, it is a synonym
for saṃsāra. It is often paired with its opposite, vyavadāna, meaning
“purification.”
g.16

aggregate
phung pho

ང་།
skandha
The five skandhas (pañcaskandha) are: forms (rūpa), sensation (vedanā),
conception (saṃjñā), formations (saṃskāra), consciousness (vijñāna).
g.17

analysis
brtag pa

བག་པ།
parīkṣā
g.18

analytical knowledge
so sor yang dag par rig pa

་ར་ཡང་དག་པར་ག་པ།
pratisaṃvid
See Har Dayal 2004, p. 260ff.
g.19

analytical knowledge of designations
chos so sor yang dag par rig pa

ས་་ར་ཡང་དག་པར་ག་པ།

dharmapratisaṃvid
g.20

analytical knowledge of the objects of designation
don so sor yang dag par rig pa

ན་་ར་ཡང་དག་པར་ག་པ།
ārthapratisaṃvid
g.21

analyze
so sor rtog par byed · so sor rtog pa

་ར་ག་པར་ད། · ་ར་ག་པ།
pratyavekṣaṇa · pratyavekṣa
The term so sor rtog pa has two meanings in our text: (1) analysis (pratyavekṣa)
and (2) comprehension, realization, awakening (pratibodha).
g.22

anumāṇa
—
—
anumāṇa
Technical term in Buddhist logic.

g.23

appearance
snang ba

ང་བ།
pratibhāsa
g.24

appearancelessness
mtshan ma med pa

མཚན་མ་ད་པ།
animitta
One of the three gates of liberation along with emptiness and wishlessness.
g.25

applications of mindfulness
dran pa nye bar gzhag pa

ན་པ་་བར་གཞག་པ།
smṛtyupasthāna
The four foundations of mindfulness refers to the application of mindfulness
to: the body, sensations, the mind, phenomena.

g.26

appropriating cognition
len pa’i rnam par shes pa

ན་པ་མ་པར་ས་པ།
ādānavijñāna
g.27

argumentative disputation
rtsod pa

ད་པ།
vivāda
g.28

aspiration
smon lam

ན་ལམ།
praṇidhāna
g.29

aspiration
mos pa

ས་པ།
praṇidhāna
g.30

assumption
mngon par zhen pa

མན་པར་ན་པ།
abhiniviśanti
g.31

attaining the powers
stobs bskyed pa

བས་བད་པ།
balādhāna
g.32

attending
rjes su dpyod pa

ས་་དོད་པ།
anucaranti
g.33

authoritative scripture
yid ches pa’i lung gi tshad ma

ད་ས་པ་ང་་ཚད་མ།
āptāgamapramāṇa
g.34

Avalokiteśvara
spyan ras gzigs · ’phags pa spyan ras gzigs dbang phyug

ན་རས་གཟིགས། · འཕགས་པ་ན་རས་གཟིགས་དབང་ག
avalokiteśvara · āryāvalokiteśvara
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
One of the “eight close sons of the Buddha,” he is also known as the
bodhisattva who embodies compassion. In certain tantras, he is also the lord
of the three families, where he embodies the compassion of the buddhas. In
Tibet, he attained great significance as a special protector of Tibet, and in
China, in female form, as Guanyin, the most important bodhisattva in all of
East Asia.
In this text:
Also mentioned in this text as Āryāvalokiteśvara, the noble Avalokiteśvara.
g.35

awakening
byang chub

ང་བ།
bodhi
g.36

awakening factors
byang chub kyi phyogs dang ’thun pa’i chos

ང་བ་་གས་དང་འན་པ་ས།
bodhipakṣyadharma
g.37

awakening mind
byang chub kyi sems

ང་བ་་མས།
bodhicitta
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
In the general Mahāyāna teachings the mind of awakening (bodhicitta) is
the intention to attain the complete awakening of a perfect buddha for the
sake of all beings. On the level of absolute truth, the mind of awakening is
the realization of the awakened state itself.
g.38

awareness

shes bzhin

ས་བན།
samprajāna
g.39

bahuvrīhi
—
—
bahuvrīhi
Type of Sanskrit compound.

g.40

bases of supernatural powers
rdzu ’phrul gyi rkang pa

་འལ་ི་ང་པ།
ṛddhipādaḥ
The four bases of supernatural powers (ṛddhipāda, rdzu ’phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi)
are: (1) concentration through will (chanda, ’dun pa), (2) concentration through
vigor (vīrya, brtson ’grus), (3) concentration through the mind (citta, bsam pa),
and (4) concentration through investigation (mīmāṃsā, dpyod pa ). See Rahula
2001, p. 163.
g.41

belief in a perduring self
’jig tshogs la lta ba

འག་གས་ལ་་བ།
satkāyadṛṣṭi
g.42

beryl
bai dUr+ya

་།
vaidūrya
g.43

bichiliocosm
stong gnyis pa bar ma’i ’jig rten gyi khams

ང་གས་པ་བར་མ་འག་ན་ི་ཁམས།
dvitīyamadhyama sāhasralokadhātu
Equal to a thousand universes of a thousand worlds (i.e., a universe of a
million worlds).
g.44

binding

’ching ba

འང་བ།
bandhana
g.45

blessed one
bcom ldan ’das

བམ་ན་འདས།
bhagavān · bhagavat
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
In Buddhist literature, this is an epithet applied to buddhas, most often to
Śākyamuni. The Sanskrit term generally means “possessing fortune,” but in
specifically Buddhist contexts it implies that a buddha is in possession of six
auspicious qualities (bhaga) associated with complete awakening. The
Tibetan term—where bcom is said to refer to “subduing” the four māras, ldan
to “possessing” the great qualities of buddhahood, and ’das to “going
beyond” saṃsāra and nirvāṇa—possibly reflects the commentarial tradition
where the Sanskrit bhagavat is interpreted, in addition, as “one who destroys
the four māras.” This is achieved either by reading bhagavat as bhagnavat
(“one who broke”), or by tracing the word bhaga to the root √bhañj (“to
break”).
g.46

body afflicted by corruption
gnas ngan len gyi lus

གནས་ངན་ན་ི་ས།
dauṣṭhulyakāya
g.47

branches of awakening
byang chub kyi yan lag

ང་བ་་ཡན་ལག
bodhyaṅgāni
The seven branches of awakening are: (1) correct mindfulness, (2) correct
discrimination of dharmas, (3) correct vigor, (4) correct joy, (5) correct
flexibility, (6) correct concentration, and (7) correct equanimity.
g.48

bring together
kun ’byung ba

ན་འང་བ།
samudaya

g.49

buddha field
sangs rgyas kyi zhing

སངས་ས་་ང་།
buddhakṣetra
Also translated as “buddha realm.”
g.50

buddha realm
sangs rgyas kyi zhing

སངས་ས་་ང་།
buddhakṣetra
Also translated as “buddha field.”
g.51

Buddha Stage
sangs rgyas kyi sa

སངས་ས་་ས།
buddhabhūmi
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.52

can [only] be known by intelligent scholars well versed in the
subtle
zhib mo brtags pa’i mkhas pa dang ’dzangs pas rig pa

བ་་བགས་པ་མཁས་པ་དང་འཛངས་པས་ག་པ།
sūkṣmaṃ nipuṇapaṇḍitavijñavedanīyaḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 2918.
g.53

causal dependence
rang dbang med pa

རང་དབང་ད་པ།
asvatantra
g.54

cause and effect
rgyu dang ’bras bu

་དང་འས་།
hetuphala
g.55

changing opinions
blo gros tha dad pa

་ོས་ཐ་དད་པ།
matibheda
g.56

characterized by
rab tu phye ba

རབ་་་བ།
prabhāvita
See Schmithausen 2014, p. 557, §512.1. Also translated here as “consisting in”
and “constituted.”
g.57

clarified butter
mar gyi snying khu

མར་ི་ང་།
sarpirmaṇḍa
Mahāvyutpatti 5683.
g.58

clear mindfulness
gsal ba

གསལ་བ།
paṭu
g.59

Cloud of Dharma
chos kyi sprin

ས་་ན།
dharmameghā
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.60

cognition
rnam par shes pa

མ་པར་ས་པ།
vijñāna
g.61

cognition that is personal and intuitive
so sor rang rig pa

་ར་རང་ག་པ།
pratyātmavedya · pratyātmavedanīya · pratyātmajñāna · prātyatmam
g.62

collection of teachings on the bodhisattva [path]

byang chub sems dpa’i sde snod

ང་བ་མས་དཔ་་ད།
bodhisattvapiṭaka
g.63

communication
ming du bya ba

ང་་་བ།
saṃjñāpya
g.64

complete equanimity
lhag par btang snyoms

ག་པར་བཏང་མས།
adhyupekṣya
g.65

completely
thams cad kyi thams cad

ཐམས་ཅད་་ཐམས་ཅད།
sarveṇa sarvam
Mahāvyutpatti 6405.
g.66

comprehension
yongs su shes pa

ངས་་ས་པ།
parijñā
g.67

concentrated
mnyam par bzhag pa

མཉམ་པར་བཞག་པ།
samāhita
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
A state of deep concentration in which the mind is absorbed in its object to
such a degree that conceptual thought is suspended. It is sometimes
interpreted as settling (āhita) the mind in equanimity (sama).
g.68

concentration
ting nge ’dzin

ང་་འན།

samādhi
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
In a general sense, samādhi can describe a number of different meditative
states. In the Mahāyāna literature, in particular in the Prajñāpāramitā sūtras,
we find extensive lists of different samādhis, numbering over one hundred.
In a more restricted sense, and when understood as a mental state, samādhi is
defined as the one-pointedness of the mind (cittaikāgratā), the ability to
remain on the same object over long periods of time. The Drajor Bamponyipa
(sgra sbyor bam po gnyis pa) commentary on the Mahāvyutpatti explains the
term samādhi as referring to the instrument through which mind and mental
states “get collected,” i.e., it is by the force of samādhi that the continuum of
mind and mental states becomes collected on a single point of reference
without getting distracted.
g.69

conception
’du shes

འ་ས།
saṃjñā
g.70

conception
rtog pa

ག་པ།
kalpanā
g.71

conceptualization
rnam rtog · rnam par rtog pa

མ་ག · མ་པར་ག་པ།
vikalpa
g.72

conceptualize
gdags pa

གདགས་པ།
prajñapti
Also translated here as “decide.”
g.73

conclusive
gcig tu nges pa

གག་་ས་པ།

aikāntikaḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 7587.
g.74

conditioned
’du byas

འ་ས།
saṃskṛta
g.75

conditioned phenomena
’du byed

འ་ད།
saṃskāra
Also translated here as “conditioning mental factors.”
g.76

conditioning mental factors
’du byed

འ་ད།
saṃskāra
Also translated here as “conditioned phenomena.”
g.77

conditioning process of the mental factors
’du byed mngon par ’du bya ba

འ་ད་མན་པར་འ་་བ།
saṃskārābhisaṃskaraṇa
g.78

conducive
grogs

ོགས།
sahāya
g.79

confined
rjes su ’brel ba

ས་་འལ་བ།
anubandha
g.80

confusion
’khrul pa

འལ་པ།
bhrānta
g.81

consequence
chud mi za ba

ད་་ཟ་བ།
avipraṇa
g.82

consideration
yongs su rtog pa

ངས་་ག་པ།
paritarka
g.83

consisting in
rab tu phye ba

རབ་་་བ།
prabhāvita
Also translated here as “characterized by” and “constituted.” See
Schmithausen 2014, p. 557, §512.1.
g.84

constancy of phenomena
chos gnas pa nyid

ས་གནས་པ་ད།
dharmasthititā
Mahāvyutpatti 1719.
g.85

constant
rnam par gnas pa

མ་པར་གནས་པ།
vyavasthita
g.86

constituent
khams

ཁམས།
dhātu

The eighteen constituents are: eye, visual object, visual consciousness; ear,
sound, auditive consciousness; nose, smell, olfactory consciousness; tongue,
taste, gustative consciousness; body, touch, tactile consciousness; mind,
mental objects, mental consciousness. When it refers to six elements, they
are: earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness.
g.87

constituted
rab tu phye ba

རབ་་་བ།
prabhāvita
See Schmithausen 2014, p. 557, §512.1. Also translated here as “characterized
by” and “consisting in.”
g.88

contemplation
bsams pa

བསམས་པ།
cintā
g.89

convention
rjes su tha snyad

ས་་ཐ་ད།
anuvyavahāra
g.90

conventionally
brda

བ།
saṃketa
g.91

correct concentration
yang dag pa’i ting nge ’dzin

ཡང་དག་པ་ང་་འན།
samyaksamādhi
g.92

correct self-restraints
yang dag par spong ba

ཡང་དག་པར་ང་བ།
samyakprahāṇa
See “four correct self-restraints.”

g.93

corruption
gnas ngan len

གནས་ངན་ན།
dauṣṭhulya
g.94

decide
gdags pa

གདགས་པ།
prajñapti
Also translated here as “conceptualize.”
g.95

dedication of merit
yongs su bsngo ba

ངས་་བ་བ།
pariṇāmanā · pariṇata
g.96

deeper
phri · phyi

། · །
—
Lit. “outer.”
g.97

deer park
ri dags kyi nags

་དགས་་ནགས།
mṛgadāva
The forest, located outside of Varanasi, where the Buddha first taught the
Dharma.
g.98

defilement
nyon mongs pa

ན་ངས་པ།
kleśa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various
psychological defilements, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure
and lead to unwholesome deeds of body, speech, and mind, acting as causes

for continued existence in saṃsāra. Included among them are the primary
afflictions of desire (rāga), anger (dveṣa), and ignorance (avidyā). It is said that
there are eighty-four thousand of these negative mental qualities, for which
the eighty-four thousand categories of the Buddha’s teachings serve as the
antidote.
Kleśa is also commonly translated as “negative emotions,” “disturbing
emotions,” and so on. The Pāli kilesa, Middle Indic kileśa, and Buddhist
Hybrid Sanskrit kleśa all primarily mean “stain” or “defilement.” The
translation “affliction” is a secondary development that derives from the
more general (non-Buddhist) classical understanding of √kliś (“to harm,“ “to
afflict”). Both meanings are noted by Buddhist commentators.
g.99

defining characteristic
mtshan nyid

མཚན་ད།
svabhāvalakṣaṇa
g.100

defining characteristic
mtshan nyid

མཚན་ད།
lakṣaṇa
g.101

delusion
gti mug

ག་ག
moha
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
One of the three poisons (dug gsum) along with aversion, or hatred, and
attachment, or desire, which perpetuate the sufferings of cyclic existence. It
is the obfuscating mental state which obstructs an individual from
generating knowledge or insight, and it is said to be the dominant
characteristic of the animal world in general. Commonly rendered as
confusion, delusion, and ignorance, or bewilderment.
g.102

delusion
kun tu rmongs pa · rnam par rmongs pa

ན་་ངས་པ། · མ་པར་ངས་པ།
saṃmoha

Also translated here as “obscuration.”
g.103

demonstration
bshad pa

བཤད་པ།
deśana
g.104

description
rnam par bsnyad pa

མ་པར་བད་པ།
vyākhyā
g.105

designation
btags pa

བཏགས་པ།
prajñapti
g.106

determination
rnam par bzhag pa

མ་པར་བཞག་པ།
vyavasthā
g.107

dhāraṇī
gzungs

གངས།
dhāraṇī
Also rendered here as “keeping it in mind,” “formula.”
g.108

Dharma discourse
chos kyi rnam grangs

ས་་མ་ངས།
dharmaparyāya
g.109

Dharma of the nonexistence of defining characteristics
mtshan nyid med pa’i chos

མཚན་ད་ད་པ་ས།
alakṣaṇadharma

Mahāvyutpatti 353.
g.110

Dharmodgata
chos ’phags

ས་འཕགས།
dharmodgata
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.
g.111

differentiating
rnam par ’byed pa

མ་པར་འད་པ།
vibhājanā
g.112

diligence
brtson ’grus

བན་འས།
viryā
Also translated here as “vigor.”
g.113

direct cognition
mngon sum gyi tshad ma

མན་མ་ི་ཚད་མ།
pratyakṣapramāṇa
g.114

direct their attention
yid la byed

ད་ལ་ད།
manasikāra
g.115

discerning
rab tu rnam par ’byed pa

རབ་་མ་པར་འད་པ།
pravicaya
g.116

discerning
nges par rtog pa · nges par rtogs pa

ས་པར་ག་པ། · ས་པར་གས་པ།

nirūpaṇā
Mahāvyutpatti 7450.
g.117

discipline
tshul khrims

ལ་མས།
śīla
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Morally virtuous or disciplined conduct and the abandonment of morally
undisciplined conduct of body, speech, and mind. In a general sense, moral
discipline is the cause for rebirth in higher, more favorable states, but it is
also foundational to Buddhist practice as one of the three trainings (triśikṣā)
and one of the six perfections of a bodhisattva. Often rendered as “ethics,”
“discipline,” and “morality.”
g.118

discourses teaching Dharma
chos gdags pa rnam par gzhag pa

ས་གདགས་པ་མ་པར་གཞག་པ།
dharmaprajñaptivyavasthā(pa)na
g.119

discriminating
bye brag ’byed pa

་ག་འད་པ།
nitīraṇa
Also rendered here as “distinguishing.”
g.120

discrimination of dharmas
chos rab tu rnam par ’byed pa

ས་རབ་་མ་པར་འད་པ།
dharmapravicaya
g.121

distinct
tha dad pa

ཐ་དད་པ།
bheda
g.122

distinctive
bye brag

་ག
viśeṣa
g.123

distinctive characteristic
bye brag gi mtshan nyid

་ག་་མཚན་ད།
viṣeśalakṣaṇa
g.124

distinctly perceive
rab tu shes

རབ་་ས།
prajānāti
g.125

distinguishing
bye brag ’byed pa

་ག་འད་པ།
nitīraṇa
Also rendered here as “discriminating.”
g.126

diversity of things
ji snyed yod pa nyid

་ད་ད་པ་ད།
yāvadbhāvikatā
g.127

domain of truth
chos kyi dbyings

ས་་དངས།
dharmadhātu
g.128

domains of mastery
zil gyis gnon pa’i skye mched

ཟིལ་ིས་གན་པ་་མད།
abhibhvāyatana
See Buswell & Lopez 2014, p. 2.
g.129

domains of totality
zad par gyi skye mched

ཟད་པར་ི་་མད།
kṛtsnāyatana
This term corresponds to the kasiṇa of the Pāli tradition, a visualization object
is used as a support for the totality of the meditator’s attention.
g.130

dvandva
—
—
dvandva
Type of Sanskrit compound.

g.131

effortless
lhun gyis grub pa

ན་ིས་བ་པ།
anābhoga
g.132

elaboration of conventional expressions
tha snyad ’dogs pa’i spros pa

ཐ་ད་འགས་པ་ས་པ།
vyavahāraprapañca
g.133

eloquence
spobs pa

བས་པ།
pratibhāna
g.134

emanation
sprul pa

ལ་པ།
nirmāṇa
See n.365.
g.135

emanation body
sprul sku

ལ་།
nirmāṇakāya
g.136

emancipation

nges par ’byung ba

ས་པར་འང་བ།
niḥsaraṇa · niryāṇa
Also translated here as “pathway.”
g.137

emptiness
stong pa nyid

ང་པ་ད།
śūnyatā
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Emptiness denotes the ultimate nature of reality, the total absence of
inherent existence and self-identity with respect to all phenomena.
According to this view, all things and events are devoid of any independent,
intrinsic reality that constitutes their essence. Nothing can be said to exist
independent of the complex network of factors that gives rise to its
origination, nor are phenomena independent of the cognitive processes and
mental constructs that make up the conventional framework within which
their identity and existence are posited. When all levels of conceptualization
dissolve and when all forms of dichotomizing tendencies are quelled
through deliberate meditative deconstruction of conceptual elaborations, the
ultimate nature of reality will finally become manifest. It is the first of the
three gateways to liberation.
g.138

emptiness devoid of rejection
dor ba med pa stong pa nyid

ར་བ་ད་པ་ང་པ་ད།
anavakāraśūnyatā
g.139

emptiness of the limitless
mtha’ las stong pa nyid

མཐའ་ལས་ང་པ་ད།
atyantaśūnyatā
g.140

emptiness of the substanceless
dngos po stong pa nyid

དས་་ང་པ་ད།
a(sva)bhāvaśūnyatā
g.141

equanimity

btang snyoms

བཏང་མས།
upekṣā
g.142

erroneous conception
mngon par zhen pa

མན་པར་ན་པ།
abhiniveśa
g.143

essence
ngo bo nyid

་་ད།
svabhāva
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
This term denotes the ontological status of phenomena, according to which
they are said to possess existence in their own right—inherently, in and of
themselves, objectively, and independent of any other phenomena such as
our conception and labelling. The absence of such an ontological reality is
defined as the true nature of reality, emptiness.
g.144

essencelessness
ngo bo nyid med pa nyid

་་ད་ད་པ་ད།
niḥsvabhāvatā
The three kinds of essencelessness are essencelessness regarding defining
characteristics, essencelessness regarding arising, and essencelessness
regarding the ultimate.
g.145

essencelessness regarding arising
skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa nyid

་བ་་་ད་ད་པ་ད།
utpattiniḥsvabhāvatā
g.146

essencelessness regarding defining characteristics
mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa nyid

མཚན་ད་་་ད་ད་པ་ད།
lakṣaṇaniḥsvabhāvatā

g.147

essencelessness regarding the ultimate
don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa nyid

ན་དམ་པ་་་ད་ད་པ་ད།
paramārthaniḥsvabhāvatā
g.148

essential characteristic
ngo bo nyid kyi mtshan nyid

་་ད་་མཚན་ད།
svabhāvalakṣaṇa
g.149

established
rnam par bzhag pa

མ་པར་བཞག་པ།
vyavasthā
Also translated here as “posited” and “determination.”
g.150

examine
brtag

བག
—
g.151

examine
rnam par dpyad

མ་པར་དད།
vicārita · vicāraṇa
g.152

examine
’jal ba

འཇལ་བ།
—
g.153

examining
yongs su dpyod pa

ངས་་དོད་པ།
parimīmāṃsā · paricāra
g.154

excellence of their peaceful conduct

bzod pa dang des pa chen po dang ldan pa

བད་པ་དང་ས་པ་ན་་དང་ན་པ།
mahākṣāntisauratyasamanvāgataḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 1115.
g.155

Excellent Intelligence
legs pa’i blo gros

གས་པ་་ོས།
sādhumatī
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.156

excited
bzlums

བམས།
uddhata
g.157

expedient
rnam grangs

མ་ངས།
paryāya
In the sūtra, paryāya is used to denote (1) an expedient or a trick in the
context of illusions produced by a magician; (2) a method, an approach
through which one can practice in accordance with a teaching; or (3) a
scripture, a teaching regarding a specific aspect.
g.158

express themselves through conventions
tha snyad ’dogs

ཐ་ད་འགས།
vyavaharanti
g.159

extent
mthar thug pa

མཐར་ག་པ།
paryanta
g.160

fabrication
yongs su rtog pa

ངས་་ག་པ།
parikalpa
g.161

factors of conditioned existence
srid pa’i yan lag

ད་པ་ཡན་ལག
bhavāṅga
The twelve factors or links of conditioned existence are: ignorance (avidyā),
mental formations (saṃskāra), consciousness (vijñāna), mind and matter
(nāmarūpa), the six sense organs (ṣaḍāyatana), contact (sparśa), sensation
(vedanā), craving (tṛṣṇā), clinging (upādāna), becoming (bhava), birth (jāti),
aging and dying (jarāmaraṇa).
g.162

faculties
dbang po

དབང་།
indriya
See “five faculties.”
g.163

faith
dad pa

དད་པ།
śraddhā
g.164

falsity
skyon chags pa

ན་ཆགས་པ།
duṣṭatā
g.165

Far Reaching
ring du song ba

ང་་ང་བ།
dūraṅgamā
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.166

faultless state of truth
yang dag pa nyid skyon med pa

ཡང་དག་པ་ད་ན་ད་པ།
samyaktvanyāma
g.167

five faculties
dbang po lnga

དབང་་།
pañcendriyāṇi
The five faculties are those of (1) faith, (2) vigor, (3) mindfulness, (4)
concentration (samādhi), and (5) wisdom (prajñā). These are similar to the five
forces but in a lesser stage of development.
g.168

five forces
stobs lnga

བས་།
pañcabalāni
Differing only in intensity, the five forces are similar to the five faculties: (1)
faith, (2) vigor, (3) mindfulness, (4) concentration (samādhi), and (5) wisdom
(prajñā).
g.169

five great fears
’jigs pa chen po lnga

འགས་པ་ན་་།
pañcamahābhaya
The five great fears are “the fear concerning livelihood, fear of disapproval,
fear of death, fear of bad transmigrations, and fear that is timidity when
addressing assemblies.” (Powers 1995, p. 316, n. 19).
g.170

five sciences
rigs pa’i gnas lnga po

གས་པ་གནས་་།
pañcavidyā
The five sciences are grammar, logic, philosophy, medicine, and crafts.
g.171

flexibility
shin tu sbyangs pa

ན་་ངས་པ།
praśrabdhi

Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Fifth among the branches or limbs of awakening (Skt. bodhyaṅga); a condition
of calm, clarity, and composure in mind and body that serves as an antidote
to negativity and confers a mental and physical capacity that facilitates
meditation and virtuous action.
g.172

focus their minds within
sems nang du ’jog

མས་ནང་་འག
cittasthāpana
g.173

foolish being
byis pa

ས་པ།
bāla
g.174

forces
stobs

བས།
bala
See “five forces.”
g.175

formula
gzungs

གངས།
dhāraṇī
“Formula” in the sense of a “mnemonic formula” encapsulating a method or
key points in a few words. On the meaning of this term, see Braarvig 1985.
Also rendered here as “keeping it in mind,” “dhāraṇī.”
g.176

foundations of training
bslab pa’i gzhi

བབ་པ་ག།
śikṣāpada
In this text, the six foundations of training are listed as generosity, discipline,
patience, diligence, meditative absorption, and wisdom.
g.177

four correct self-restraints

yang dag par spong ba bzhi

ཡང་དག་པར་ང་བ་བ།
catvāri prahāṇāni
The four correct self-restraints are: giving up nonvirtues, avoiding
nonvirtues, generating virtues, developing virtues. See Edgerton 1953, p.
389,2.
g.178

four kinds of assurance
mi ’jigs pa bzhi

་འགས་པ་བ།
catvāri vaiśāradyāni
The four kinds of assurance of a tathāgata are (1) assurance concerning
complete awakening (abhisambodhivaiśāradya, thams cad mkhyen pa la mi ’jigs pa
); (2) assurance concerning the destruction of the impurities
(āsravakṣayavaiśāradya, zag pa zad pa mkhyen pa la mi ’jigs pa); (3) assurance
concerning harmful things (antarāyikadharmavaiśāradya, bar du gcod pa’i chos la
mi ’jigs pa); and (4) assurance concerning the path that leads to emancipation
(nairyāṇikapratipadvaiśāradya, thob par ’gyur bar nges par ’byung ba’i lam la mi ’jigs
pa). See Rahula 2001, p. 230, in which they are called “perfect selfconfidence.”
g.179

four kinds of sustenance
zas bzhi

ཟས་བ།
catvārāhārāḥ
The four kinds of sustenance are the sustenance of material ingestion, the
sustenance of contact, the sustenance of will, and the sustenance of
consciousness.
g.180

four methods of conversion
bsdu ba’i dngos po bzhi’i ming

བ་བ་དས་་བ་ང་།
catvāri saṃgrahavastūni
Mahāvyutpatti 924. The four methods of conversion are: (1) generosity (dāna),
(2) kind words (priyavādita), (3) being supportive of others (arthacaryā), and (4)
being consistent with one’s own teachings (samānārthatā). (see Mvyut 924).
g.181

four noble truths

’phags pa’i bden pa bzhi

འཕགས་པ་བན་པ་བ།
catvāri āryasatyāni
The four noble truths, as stated in this sūtra, are: the comprehension of
suffering, the abandoning of the cause of suffering, the actualization of the
cessation of suffering, and the practice of the path.
g.182

four seals of Dharma
phyag rgya bzhi

ག་་བ།
caturmudrā
The impermanence of all conditioned phenomena, the suffering inherent to
all conditioned phenomena, the selflessness of all phenomena, and nirvāṇa
as the state of peace.
g.183

free from covetousness
zang zing med pa

ཟང་ཟིང་ད་པ།
nirāmiṣa
In the sense of “disinterested,” “not expecting a reward.”
g.184

free of any wrongdoing
kha na ma tho ba med pa

ཁ་ན་མ་་བ་ད་པ།
anavadya
g.185

Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana
don zab dgongs pa nges par ’grel

ན་ཟབ་དངས་པ་ས་པར་འལ།
gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.
g.186

gandharva
dri za

་ཟ།
gandharva
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:

A class of generally benevolent nonhuman beings who inhabit the skies,
sometimes said to inhabit fantastic cities in the clouds, and more specifically
to dwell on the eastern slopes of Mount Meru, where they are ruled by the
Great King Dhṛtarāṣṭra. They are most renowned as celestial musicians who
serve the gods. In the Abhidharma, the term is also used to refer to the
mental body assumed by sentient beings during the intermediate state
between death and rebirth. Gandharvas are said to live on fragrances
(gandha) in the desire realm, hence the Tibetan translation dri za, meaning
“scent eater.”
g.187

garuḍa
—
—
garuḍa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
In Indian mythology, the garuḍa is an eagle-like bird that is regarded as the
king of all birds, normally depicted with a sharp, owl-like beak, often holding
a snake, and with large and powerful wings. They are traditionally enemies
of the nāgas. In the Vedas, they are said to have brought nectar from the
heavens to earth. Garuḍa can also be used as a proper name for a king of such
creatures.

g.188

gates of liberation
rnam par thar pa’i sgo

མ་པར་ཐར་པ་།
vimokṣamukha
Emptiness, appearancelessness, and wishlessness.
g.189

gāthā
tshigs su bcad pa

གས་་བཅད་པ།
gāthā
A gāthā is a verse or stanza.
g.190

generosity
sbyin pa

ན་པ།
—

g.191

gnosis
ye shes

་ས།
jñāna
g.192

gnosis and vision
shes pa dang mthong ba

ས་པ་དང་མང་བ།
jñānadarśana
g.193

gone forth
nges par ’byung ba

ས་པར་འང་བ།
niryātaka · parivrājaka
Having left one’s home to become a wandering mendicant. Also translated
here as emancipation and as pathway.
g.194

great emptiness
chen po stong pa nyid

ན་་ང་པ་ད།
mahāśūnyatā
The emptiness of the space containing all domains, objects, and locations.
g.195

Guṇākara
yon tan ’byung gnas

ན་ཏན་འང་གནས།
guṇākara
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.
g.196

had realized the sameness [of all phenomena], the state of a
buddha in which there is neither a center nor a periphery
mtha’ dang dbus med pa’i sangs rgyas kyi sa mnyam pa nyid bu thugs su chud pa

མཐའ་དང་དས་ད་པ་སངས་ས་་ས་མཉམ་པ་ད་་གས་་ད་པ།
anantamadhyabuddhabhūmisamatādhigataḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 369.
g.197

Hard to Conquer

shin tu sbyang dka’

ན་་ང་དཀའ།
sudurjayā
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.198

hearer
nyan thos

ཉན་ས།
śrāvaka
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The Sanskrit term śrāvaka, and the Tibetan nyan thos, both derived from the
verb “to hear,” are usually defined as “those who hear the teaching from the
Buddha and make it heard to others.” Primarily this refers to those disciples of
the Buddha who aspire to attain the state of an arhat seeking their own
liberation and nirvāṇa. They are the practitioners of the first turning of the
wheel of the Dharma on the four noble truths, who realize the suffering
inherent in saṃsāra and focus on understanding that there is no
independent self. By conquering afflicted mental states (kleśa), they liberate
themselves, attaining first the stage of stream enterers at the path of seeing,
followed by the stage of once-returners who will be reborn only one more
time, and then the stage of non-returners who will no longer be reborn into
the desire realm. The final goal is to become an arhat. These four stages are
also known as the “four results of spiritual practice.”
g.199

hell being
dmyal ba pa

དལ་བ་པ།
nāraka
Type of being in Buddhist cosmogony.
g.200

how
ji tsam du

་ཙམ་།
tāvatā · tāvat · yāvat
With the meaning of “truly, really, indeed.”
g.201

hungry ghost
yi dags

་དགས།
preta
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
One of the five or six classes of sentient beings, into which beings are born
as the karmic fruition of past miserliness. As the term in Sanskrit means “the
departed,” they are analogous to the ancestral spirits of Vedic tradition, the
pitṛs, who starve without the offerings of descendants. It is also commonly
translated as “hungry ghost” or “starving spirit,” as in the Chinese

餓⿁ e

gui.
They are sometimes said to reside in the realm of Yama, but are also
frequently described as roaming charnel grounds and other inhospitable or
frightening places along with piśācas and other such beings. They are
particularly known to suffer from great hunger and thirst and the inability to
acquire sustenance. Detailed descriptions of their realm and experience,
including a list of the thirty-six classes of pretas, can be found in The
Application of Mindfulness of the Sacred Dharma, Toh 287, 2.1281– 2.1482.
g.202

Illuminating
’od byed pa

ད་ད་པ།
prabhākarī
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.203

image
gzugs brnyan

གགས་བན།
pratibimba
Also translated as “reflection.”
g.204

imaginary
kun brtags pa

ན་བགས་པ།
parikalpita
g.205

imaginary defining characteristic
kun brtags pa’i mtshan nyid

ན་བགས་པ་མཚན་ད།
parikalpitalakṣaṇa

The imaginary defining characteristic corresponds to the attribution of an
essence, an inherent entity, to that which is by nature dependent on an other
(paratantra) to exist or appear as what it is perceived to be.
g.206

imaginary essence
kun brtags pa’i ngo bo nyid · kun brtags pa’i rang bzhin

ན་བགས་པ་་་ད། · ན་བགས་པ་རང་བན།
parikalpitasvabhāva
g.207

imagination
kun tu rtog pa

ན་་ག་པ།
saṃkalpa · parikalpa
g.208

Immovable
mi g.yo ba

་ག་བ།
acalā
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.209

in accordance with the truth
yang dag pa ji lta ba bzhin du

ཡང་དག་པ་་་བ་བན་།
yathābhūtam
g.210

in their own experience
nang gi so sor rang rig pa

ནང་་་ར་རང་ག་པ།
adhyātmaṃ prātyatmam
g.211

inconclusive
gcig tu ma nges pa

གག་་མ་ས་པ།
anaikāntikaḥ
g.212

inexhaustible
mi zad pa · ma ’tshal ba

་ཟད་པ། · མ་འཚལ་བ།

akṣaya
g.213

Inexpressible
brjod du med

བད་་ད།
anabhilāpya
g.214

inference
rjes su dpag pa’i tshad ma

ས་་དཔག་པ་ཚད་མ།
anumānapramāṇa
g.215

innate
lhan cig skyes

ན་ག་ས།
sahaja
g.216

inner absorption
nang du yang dag bzhag

ནང་་ཡང་དག་བཞག
pratisaṃlāna
g.217

innermost
snying po

ང་།
—
Lit “heart” or “marrow.”
g.218

inquiry
yongs su tshol ba

ངས་་ལ་བ།
paryeṣaṇā
g.219

insight
lhag mthong

ག་མང་།
vipaśyanā

Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
An important form of Buddhist meditation focusing on developing insight
into the nature of phenomena. Often presented as part of a pair of meditation
techniques, the other being śamatha, “calm abiding”.
g.220

intelligence
blo gros

་ོས།
mati
g.221

intention
bsam pa

བསམ་པ།
āśaya
g.222

investigating
rtog pa

ག་པ།
vitarka
Also translated here as “mental engagement.”
g.223

investigation
dpyod pa

དོད་པ།
vicāra
In our text, the specific quality of vicāra is to remain mindful of nimitta in the
sense of “mentally watching” or noting them without engaging in a more
discursive way.
g.224

Jambudvīpa
’dzam bu gling

འཛམ་་ང་།
jambudvīpa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The name of the southern continent in Buddhist cosmology, which can
signify either the known human world, or more specifically the Indian
subcontinent, literally “the jambu island/continent.” Jambu is the name used
for a range of plum-like fruits from trees belonging to the genus Szygium,

particularly Szygium jambos and Szygium cumini, and it has commonly been
rendered “rose apple,” although “black plum” may be a less misleading
term. Among various explanations given for the continent being so named,
one (in the Abhidharmakośa) is that a jambu tree grows in its northern
mountains beside Lake Anavatapta, mythically considered the source of the
four great rivers of India, and that the continent is therefore named from the
tree or the fruit. Jambudvīpa has the Vajrāsana at its center and is the only
continent upon which buddhas attain awakening.
g.225

joy
dga’ ba

དགའ་བ།
prīti
g.226

karmadhāraya
—
—
karmadhāraya
Type of Sanskrit compound.

g.227

keep it in mind
gzung bar bgyi

གང་བར་བི།
dhārayāmi
g.228

keep it in mind
zung shig

ང་ག
dhāraya
(cf. Sanskrit text in Matsuda 2013, p. 940 ad Lamotte VIII.41). Dhāraya is a
causative imperative of dhṛ-.
g.229

keeping it in mind
gzungs

གངས།
dhāraṇī
Also rendered here as “dhāraṇī,” “formula.”
g.230

kinnara

—
—
kinnara
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
A class of nonhuman beings that resemble humans to the degree that their
very name —which means “is that human?”—suggests some confusion as to
their divine status. Kinnaras are mythological beings found in both Buddhist
and Brahmanical literature, where they are portrayed as creatures half
human, half animal. They are often depicted as highly skilled celestial
musicians.
g.231

Kīrtimat
grags pa can

གས་པ་ཅན།
kīrtimat
World of the tathāgata Viśālakīrti.
g.232

label
ming du btags · ’jig rten gyi ming du btags pa · ’jig rten gyi tha snyad
· ’jig rten gyi tha snyad du btags pa
· ’jig rten gyi tha snyad du btags pa’am ’jig rten gyi tha snyad
· ’jig rten gyi tha snyad du btags pa’am ’jig rten tha snyad · ’jig rten tha snyad
· btags pa’i tshig

ང་་བཏགས། · འག་ན་ི་ང་་བཏགས་པ། · འག་ན་ི་ཐ་ད།

· འག་ན་ི་ཐ་ད་་བཏགས་པ། · འག་ན་ི་ཐ་ད་་བཏགས་པའམ་འག་ན་ི་ཐ་ད།

· འག་ན་ི་ཐ་ད་་བཏགས་པའམ་འག་ན་ཐ་ད། · འག་ན་ཐ་ད། · བཏགས་པ་ག
lokasaṃjñā
Mahāvyutpatti 6558.
g.233

lacked certainty
yid gnyis can

ད་གས་ཅན།
vimati
g.234

latent disposition
bag la nyal

བག་ལ་ཉལ།
anuśaya

Also translated here as “predisposition.”
g.235

liberation
rnam par thar pa

མ་པར་ཐར་པ།
vimokṣa
See Hayal 1978: 229.
g.236

lies hidden
rab tu sbyor bar byed pa

རབ་་ར་བར་ད་པ།
pralayanata
g.237

literal
sgra ji bzhin

་་བན།
yathāruta
g.238

magic illusion
sgyu ma’i las · sgyu ma byas pa

་མ་ལས། · ་མ་ས་པ།
—
g.239

mahoraga
—
—
mahoraga
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Literally “great serpents,” mahoragas are supernatural beings depicted as
large, subterranean beings with human torsos and heads and the lower
bodies of serpents. Their movements are said to cause earthquakes, and they
make up a class of subterranean geomantic spirits whose movement through
the seasons and months of the year is deemed significant for construction
projects.

g.240

Maitreya
byams pa

མས་པ།

maitreya
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The bodhisattva Maitreya is an important figure in many Buddhist traditions,
where he is unanimously regarded as the buddha of the future era. He is
said to currently reside in the heaven of Tuṣita, as Śākyamuni’s regent,
where he awaits the proper time to take his final rebirth and become the fifth
buddha in the Fortunate Eon, reestablishing the Dharma in this world after
the teachings of the current buddha have disappeared. Within the Mahāyāna
sūtras, Maitreya is elevated to the same status as other central bodhisattvas
such as Mañjuśrī and Avalokiteśvara, and his name appears frequently in
sūtras, either as the Buddha’s interlocutor or as a teacher of the Dharma.
Maitreya literally means “Loving One.” He is also known as Ajita, meaning
“Invincible.”
For more information on Maitreya, see, for example, the introduction to
Maitreya’s Setting Out (Toh 198).
g.241

Manifest
mngon du gyur pa

མན་་ར་པ།
abhimukhī
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.242

Mañjuśrī
’jam dpal

འཇམ་དཔལ།
mañjuśrī
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Mañjuśrī is one of the “eight close sons of the Buddha” and a bodhisattva
who embodies wisdom. He is a major figure in the Mahāyāna sūtras,
appearing often as an interlocutor of the Buddha. In his most well-known
iconographic form, he is portrayed bearing the sword of wisdom in his right
hand and a volume of the Prajñāpāramitāsūtra in his left. To his name,
Mañjuśrī, meaning “Gentle and Glorious One,” is often added the epithet
Kumārabhūta, “having a youthful form.” He is also called Mañjughoṣa,
Mañjusvara, and Pañcaśikha.
g.243

mātṛkā
ma mo

མ་།

mātṛkā
An early name for the Abhidharmapiṭaka and also a germinal list or index of
topics.
g.244

meaning of true reality
de kho na’i don

་་ན་ན།
tattvārtha
g.245

meditative absorption
bsam gtan

བསམ་གཏན།
dhyāna
See Hayal 1978, p. 221.
g.246

mental appearance
sems kyi mtshan ma

མས་་མཚན་མ།
cittanimitta
g.247

mental elaboration
spros pa

ས་པ།
prapañca
g.248

mental engagement
rtog pa

ག་པ།
vitarka
Also translated here as “investigating.”
g.249

mental imprint
bag chags

བག་ཆགས།
vāsanā
g.250

mental inspection
so sor brtag pa

་ར་བག་པ།
pratisaṃkhyā
g.251

mental state
sems las byung ba

མས་ལས་ང་བ།
caitasika
g.252

mental stillness
zhi gnas

་གནས།
śamatha
g.253

mere representation
rnam par rig pa tsam

མ་པར་ག་པ་ཙམ།
vijñaptimātra
g.254

mind
sems

མས།
citta
g.255

mind containing all the seeds
sa bon thams cad pa’i sems

ས་ན་ཐམས་ཅད་པ་མས།
sarvabījaṃ cittam
Schmithausen translates this term with “all-seed mind,” which can mean
both “mind containing all the seeds” or “mind consisting of all the seeds.”
See Schmithausen 2014, p. 65, n. 221.
g.256

mindfulness
dran pa

ན་པ།
smṛti
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:

This is the faculty that enables the mind to maintain its attention on a
referent object, counteracting the arising of forgetfulness, which is a great
obstacle to meditative stability. The root smṛ may mean “to recollect” but also
simply “to think of.” Broadly speaking, smṛti, commonly translated as
“mindfulness,” means to bring something to mind, not necessarily
something experienced in a distant past but also something that is
experienced in the present, such as the position of one’s body or the breath.
Together with alertness (samprajāna, shes bzhin), it is one of the two
indispensable factors for the development of calm abiding (śamatha, zhi gnas).
g.257

nāga
klu

།
nāga
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
A class of nonhuman beings who live in subterranean aquatic environments,
where they guard wealth and sometimes also teachings. Nāgas are
associated with serpents and have a snakelike appearance. In Buddhist art
and in written accounts, they are regularly portrayed as half human and half
snake, and they are also said to have the ability to change into human form.
Some nāgas are Dharma protectors, but they can also bring retribution if they
are disturbed. They may likewise fight one another, wage war, and destroy
the lands of others by causing lightning, hail, and flooding.
g.258

naturally present
rang bzhin du gnas pa

རང་བན་་གནས་པ།
svabhāvasthita · svabhāvasthita · nisargabhāva
Schmithausen understands this term as meaning “normal”: “should we
[indeed] say that even the normal (rang bzhin du gnas pa, *prakṛtisthita?)
images…” (Schmithausen 2014, p. 392, n. 1733). I understand the use of rang
bzhin du gnas pa as implying a context where the object of the cognition is not
an object of concentration corresponding to visualization practices as in the
case of the kasiṇa. In the Pāli tradition, kasiṇa designates a visualization object
used as a support for the totality of the meditator’s attention. In this
paragraph, sems can has the connotation of beings who do not practice the
yoga taught in this chapter, that is, ordinary beings.
g.259

nature of phenomena
chos nyid

ས་ད།
dharmatā
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The real nature, true quality, or condition of things. Throughout Buddhist
discourse this term is used in two distinct ways. In one, it designates the
relative nature that is either the essential characteristic of a specific
phenomenon, such as the heat of fire and the moisture of water, or the
defining feature of a specific term or category. The other very important and
widespread way it is used is to designate the ultimate nature of all
phenomena, which cannot be conveyed in conceptual, dualistic terms and is
often synonymous with emptiness or the absence of intrinsic existence.
g.260

nature of things
ji lta ba bzhin du yod pa nyid

་་བ་བན་་ད་པ་ད།
yathāvadbhāvikatā
g.261

negate
skur pa ’debs

ར་པ་འབས།
apavāda
g.262

negation
skur pa ’debs pa

ར་པ་འབས་པ།
apavāda
g.263

next life
’jig rten pha rol

འག་ན་ཕ་ལ།
paraloka
Lit. “the world beyond [death].”
g.264

nidāna
gleng gzhi

ང་ག།
nidāna
Introductory part of a sūtra .

g.265

nirvāṇa
mya ngan las ’das pa

་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ།
nirvāṇa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
In Sanskrit, the term nirvāṇa literally means “extinguishment” and the
Tibetan mya ngan las ’das pa literally means “gone beyond sorrow.” As a
general term, it refers to the cessation of all suffering, afflicted mental states
(kleśa), and causal processes (karman) that lead to rebirth and suffering in
cyclic existence, as well as to the state in which all such rebirth and suffering
has permanently ceased.
More specifically, three main types of nirvāṇa are identified. (1) The first type
of nirvāṇa, called nirvāṇa with remainder (sopadhiśeṣanirvāṇa), is the state in
which arhats or buddhas have attained awakening but are still dependent
on the conditioned aggregates until their lifespan is exhausted. (2) At the
end of life, given that there are no more causes for rebirth, these aggregates
cease and no new aggregates arise. What occurs then is called nirvāṇa
without remainder ( anupadhiśeṣanirvāṇa), which refers to the unconditioned
element (dhātu) of nirvāṇa in which there is no remainder of the aggregates.
(3) The Mahāyāna teachings distinguish the final nirvāṇa of buddhas from
that of arhats, the nirvāṇa of arhats not being considered ultimate. The
buddhas attain what is called nonabiding nirvāṇa (apratiṣṭhitanirvāṇa), which
transcends the extremes of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, i.e., existence and peace.
This is the nirvāṇa that is the goal of the Mahāyāna path.
g.266

noble being
’phags pa

འཕགས་པ།
ārya
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The Sanskrit ārya has the general meaning of a noble person, one of a higher
class or caste. In Buddhist literature, depending on the context, it often
means specifically one who has gained the realization of the path and is
superior for that reason. In particular, it applies to stream enterers, oncereturners, non-returners, and worthy ones (arhats) and is also used as an
epithet of bodhisattvas. In the five-path system, it refers to someone who has
achieved at least the path of seeing (darśanamārga).
g.267

noble truth

’phags pa’i bden pa

འཕགས་པ་བན་པ།
āryasatya
See “four noble truths.”
g.268

non-Buddhist
mu stegs pa

་གས་པ།
tīrthika
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Those of other religious or philosophical orders, contemporary with the early
Buddhist order, including Jains, Jaṭilas, Ājīvikas, and Cārvākas. Tīrthika
(“forder”) literally translates as “one belonging to or associated with
(possessive suffix –ika) stairs for landing or for descent into a river,” or “a
bathing place,” or “a place of pilgrimage on the banks of sacred streams”
(Monier-Williams). The term may have originally referred to temple priests at
river crossings or fords where travelers propitiated a deity before crossing.
The Sanskrit term seems to have undergone metonymic transfer in referring
to those able to ford the turbulent river of saṃsāra (as in the Jain
tīrthaṅkaras, “ford makers”), and it came to be used in Buddhist sources to
refer to teachers of rival religious traditions. The Sanskrit term is closely
rendered by the Tibetan mu stegs pa: “those on the steps (stegs pa) at the edge
(mu).”
g.269

nonduality
gnyis su med pa

གས་་ད་པ།
advaya
Mahāvyutpatti 1717.
g.270

object
dngos po · yul

དས་། · ལ།
vastu
g.271

object conducive to purification
rnam par dag pa’i dmigs pa

མ་པར་དག་པ་དགས་པ།

*viśuddhyālambana
See Schmithausen 2014, p. 362, §306.5 and n. 1644.
g.272

object of experience
spyod yul

ད་ལ།
gocara
Also translated here as “sphere of activity.” See n.42.
g.273

obscuration
kun tu rmongs pa

ན་་ངས་པ།
saṃmoha
Also translated here as “delusion.”
g.274

obscuration of cognitive objects
shes bya’i sgrib pa

ས་་བ་པ།
jñeyāvaraṇa
g.275

obstacle
gegs

གས།
vibandha
g.276

obstruction
sgrib pa

བ་པ།
āvaraṇa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The obscurations to liberation and omniscience. They are generally
categorized as two types: affective obscurations (kleśāvaraṇa), the arising of
afflictive emotions; and cognitive obscurations (jñeyāvaraṇa), those caused by
misapprehension and incorrect understanding about the nature of reality.
The term is used also as a reference to a set five hindrances on the path:
longing for sense pleasures (Skt. kāmacchanda), malice (Skt. vyāpāda), sloth and
torpor (Skt. styānamiddha), excitement and remorse (Skt. auddhatyakaukṛtya),

and doubt (Skt. vicikitsā).
g.277

of a single nature
ro gcig pa

་གག་པ།
ekarasa
g.278

one-pointedness of mind
sems rtse gcig pa nyid

མས་་གག་པ་ད།
cittaikāgratā
g.279

ordinary being
so so’i skye bo

་ ་་།
pṛthagjana
g.280

other-dependent
gzhan gyi dbang

གཞན་ི་དབང་།
paratantra
g.281

other-dependent defining characteristic
gzhan gyi dbang gi mtshan nyid

གཞན་ི་དབང་་མཚན་ད།
paratantralakṣaṇa
g.282

other-dependent essence
gzhan gyi dbang gi ngo bo nyid · gzhan gyi dbang gi rang bzhin

གཞན་ི་དབང་་་་ད། · གཞན་ི་དབང་་རང་བན།
paratantrasvabhāva
g.283

Paramārthasamudgata
don dam yang dag ’phags

ན་དམ་ཡང་དག་འཕགས།
paramārthasamudgata
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.

g.284

parinirvāṇa
yongs su mya ngan las ’das pa

ངས་་་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ།
parinirvāṇa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
This refers to what occurs at the end of an arhat’s or a buddha’s life. When
nirvāṇa is attained at awakening, whether as an arhat or buddha, all
suffering, afflicted mental states (kleśa), and causal processes (karman) that
lead to rebirth and suffering in cyclic existence have ceased, but due to
previously accumulated karma, the aggregates of that life remain and must
still exhaust themselves. It is only at the end of life that these cease, and
since no new aggregates arise, the arhat or buddha is said to attain
parinirvāṇa, meaning “complete” or “final” nirvāṇa. This is synonymous with
the attainment of nirvāṇa without remainder (anupadhiśeṣanirvāṇa).
According to the Mahāyāna view of a single vehicle (ekayāna), the arhat’s
parinirvāṇa at death, despite being so called, is not final. The arhat must still
enter the bodhisattva path and reach buddhahood (see Unraveling the Intent,
Toh 106, 7.14.) On the other hand, the parinirvāṇa of a buddha, ultimately
speaking, should be understood as a display manifested for the benefit of
beings; see The Teaching on the Extraordinary Transformation That Is the Miracle of
Attaining the Buddha’s Powers (Toh 186), 1.32.
The term parinirvāṇa is also associated specifically with the passing away of
the Buddha Śākyamuni, in Kuśinagara, in northern India.
g.285

pathway
nges par ’byung ba

ས་པར་འང་བ།
niḥsaraṇa · niryāṇa
Setting forth, issue, exit, departure, escape, a road out of town. Also
translated here as “emancipated” and “gone forth.”
See also n.39.
g.286

patience
bzod pa

བད་པ།
—
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:

A term meaning acceptance, forbearance, or patience. As the third of the six
perfections, patience is classified into three kinds: the capacity to tolerate
abuse from sentient beings, to tolerate the hardships of the path to
buddhahood, and to tolerate the profound nature of reality. As a term
referring to a bodhisattva’s realization, dharmakṣānti (chos la bzod pa) can refer
to the ways one becomes “receptive” to the nature of Dharma, and it can be
an abbreviation of anutpattikadharmakṣānti, “forbearance for the unborn
nature, or nonproduction, of dharmas.”
g.287

paying attention
yang dag par rjes su mthong ba

ཡང་དག་པར་ས་་མང་བ།
samanupaśyati
g.288

perfection
pha rol tu phyin pa

ཕ་ལ་་ན་པ།
pāramitā
g.289

perfection of wisdom
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa

ས་རབ་་ཕ་ལ་་ན་པ།
prajñāpāramitā
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The sixth of the six perfections, it refers to the profound understanding of
the emptiness of all phenomena, the realization of ultimate reality. It is often
personified as a female deity, worshiped as the “Mother of All Buddhas”
(sarvajinamātā).
g.290

perfectly pure cognition
blo shin tu rnam par dag pa

་ན་་མ་པར་དག་པ།
suviśuddhabuddhiḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 351.
g.291

perfectly skilled in the sameness of the three times
dus gsum mnyam pa nyid tshar phyin pa

ས་གམ་མཉམ་པ་ད་ཚར་ན་པ།

tryadhvasamatāniryātaḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 360.
g.292

phenomenal appearance
mtshan ma

མཚན་མ།
nimitta
g.293

phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena
—
—
saṃskāranimitta

g.294

point where phenomena end
dngos po’i mtha’

དས་ ་མཐའ།
vastvanta
g.295

point where the sphere of space ends
nam mkha’i khams kyi mthas gtugs pa

ནམ་མཁ་ཁམས་་མཐས་གགས་པ།
ākāśadhātuparyavasānaḥ
g.296

posited
rnam par bzhag pa

མ་པར་བཞག་པ།
vyavasthā
This term has the connotation of something being agreed upon, represented,
arranged, settled, decreed, or established. Also translated here as
“established” and “posited.”
g.297

possessed the gnosis bodhisattvas vow to accomplish
ye shes byang chub sems dpa’ thams cad kyis yang dag par mnos pa

་ས་ང་བ་མས་དཔའ་ཐམས་ཅད་ས་ཡང་དག་པར་མས་པ།
sarvabodhisattvasampratīcchītajñanaḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 366.
g.298

prasiddhānumāṇa

—
—
prasiddhānumāṇa
Technical term in Buddhist logic.
g.299

prātimokṣa
so sor thar pa

་ར་ཐར་པ།
prātimokṣa
“Prātimokṣa” is the name given to the code of conduct binding on monks
and nuns. The term can be used to refer both to the disciplinary rules
themselves and to the texts from the Vinaya that contain them. There are
multiple recensions of the Prātimokṣa, each transmitted by a different
monastic fraternity in ancient and medieval India. Three remain living
traditions, one of them the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya of Tibetan Buddhism.
Though the numbers of rules vary across the different recensions, they are
all organized according to the same principles and with the same
disciplinary categories. It is customary for monastics to recite the Prātimokṣa
Sūtra fortnightly. According to some Mahāyana sūtras, a separate set of
prātimokṣa rules exists for bodhisattvas, which are based on bodhisattva
conduct as taught in that vehicle.
g.300

predisposition
bag la nyal

བག་ལ་ཉལ།
anuśaya
Also translated here are “latent disposition.”
g.301

primordially in the state of peace
gzod ma nas zhib

གད་མ་ནས་བ།
ādiśānta
g.302

prince
gzhon nur gyur pa

གན་ར་ར་པ།
kumārabhūta
g.303

principle of reason

rigs pa

གས་པ།
yukti
The four principles of reason (yukti) are : (1) the principle of reason based on
dependence (apekṣāyukti), (2) the principle of reason based on cause and
effect (kāryakāraṇayukti), (3) the principle of reason based on logical proof
(upapattisādhanayukti), and (4) the principle of reason based on the nature of
phenomena itself (dharmatāyukti).
On “principle of reason” as a translation for yukti, see Kapstein 1988, p. 152ff.
See also Lin 2010 for an overview of yukti in Saṃdh.
g.304

principle of reason based on cause and effect
bya ba byed pa’i rigs pa

་བ་ད་པ་གས་པ།
kāryakāraṇayukti
g.305

principle of reason based on dependence
de la ltos pa’i rigs pa

་ལ་ས་པ་གས་པ།
apekṣāyukti
g.306

principle of reason based on logical proof
’thad pas sgrub pa’i rigs pa

འཐད་པས་བ་པ་གས་པ།
upapattisādhanayukti
g.307

principle of reason based on the nature of phenomena itself
chos nyid kyi rigs pa

ས་ད་་གས་པ།
dharmatāyukti
g.308

producing or bringing about a [new] existence
lus mngon par ’grub cing ’byung bar ’gyur ba

ས་མན་པར་འབ་ང་འང་བར་འར་བ།
ātmabhāvam abhinirvartayanti
g.309

purification
rnam par dag pa

མ་པར་དག་པ།
viśuddhi
g.310

purity of their merit
yon yongs su sbyong ba chen po

ན་ངས་་ང་བ་ན་།
mahādakṣiṇāpariṣodhakaḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 1113.
g.311

quality
chos

ས།
dharma
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The polysemous word chos (usually a translation of dharma) is used here in
the sense of “qualities,” as when someone or something is said to possess
particularly efficacious, good, or beneficial qualities. It also can mean
“virtue” in the nonreligious and nonmoral sense.
g.312

Radiant
’od ’phro ba can

ད་འ་བ་ཅན།
arciṣmatī
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.313

reason
rtags

གས།
hetu
g.314

recluse
dge sbyong

ད་ང་།
śrāmaṇa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:

A general term applied to spiritual practitioners who live as ascetic
mendicants. In Buddhist texts, the term usually refers to Buddhist monastics,
but it can also designate a practitioner from other ascetic/monastic spiritual
traditions. In this context śramaṇa is often contrasted with the term brāhmaṇa
(bram ze), which refers broadly to followers of the Vedic tradition. Any
renunciate, not just a Buddhist, could be referred to as a śramaṇa if they were
not within the Vedic fold. The epithet Great Śramaṇa is often applied to the
Buddha.
g.315

recollect what they have heard
thos pa’i gzungs

ས་པ་གངས།
śrutidhāraṇī
g.316

referential object
dmigs pa

དགས་པ།
ālambana
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
dmigs (pa) translates a number of Sanskrit terms, including ālambana,
upalabdhi, and ālambate. These terms commonly refer to the apprehending of a
subject, an object, and the relationships that exist between them. The term
may also be translated as “referentiality,” meaning a system based on the
existence of referent objects, referent subjects, and the referential
relationships that exist between them. As part of their doctrine of “threefold
nonapprehending/nonreferentiality” (’khor gsum mi dmigs pa), Mahāyāna
Buddhists famously assert that all three categories of apprehending lack
substantiality.
g.317

reflection
gzugs brnyan

གགས་བན།
pratibimba
Also translated as “image.”
g.318

results produced by the maturation [of their karma]
rnam par smin pa’i ’bras bu

མ་པར་ན་པ་འས་།
vipākaphala

g.319

room
gnas

གནས།
sthāna
g.320

Ṛṣivadana
drang srong smra ba

ང་ང་་བ།
ṛṣivadana
A sacred area located outside of Vārāṇasī where many sages are said to have
practiced in the past.
g.321

sapakṣa
—
—
sapakṣa
Technical term in Buddhist logic.

g.322

scrutinizing
lta ba

་བ།
prekṣate
Mahāvyutpatti 7470.
g.323

secondary defilement
nye ba’i nyon mongs

་བ་ན་ངས།
upakleśa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The subsidiary afflictive emotions that arise in dependence upon the six root
afflictive emotions (attachment, hatred, pride, ignorance, doubt, and wrong
view); they are (1) anger (krodha, khro ba), (2) enmity/malice (upanāha, ’khon
’dzin), (3) concealment (mrakśa, ’chab pa), (4) outrage (pradāsa, ’tshig pa), (5)
jealousy (īrśya, phrag dog), (6) miserliness (matsarya, ser sna), (7) deceit (māyā,
sgyu), (8) dishonesty (śāṭhya, g.yo), (9) haughtiness (mada, rgyags pa), (10)
harmfulness (vihiṃsa, rnam par ’tshe ba), (11) shamelessness (āhrīkya, ngo tsha
med pa), (12) non-consideration (anapatrāpya, khril med pa), (13) lack of faith
(aśraddhya, ma dad pa), (14) laziness (kausīdya, le lo), (15) non-conscientiousness

(pramāda, bag med pa), (16) forgetfulness (muśitasmṛtitā, brjed nges), (17) nonintrospection (asaṃprajanya, shes bzhin ma yin pa), (18) dullness (nigmagṇa,
bying ba), (19) agitation (auddhatya, rgod pa), and (20) distraction (vikṣepa, rnam
g.yeng) (Rigzin 329, 129).
g.324

sense domain
skye mched

་མད།
āyatana
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
These can be listed as twelve or as six sense sources (sometimes also called
sense fields, bases of cognition, or simply āyatanas).
In the context of epistemology, it is one way of describing experience and
the world in terms of twelve sense sources, which can be divided into inner
and outer sense sources, namely: (1–2) eye and form, (3–4) ear and sound, (5–
6) nose and odor, (7–8) tongue and taste, (9–10) body and touch, (11–12)
mind and mental phenomena.
In the context of the twelve links of dependent origination, only six sense
sources are mentioned, and they are the inner sense sources (identical to the
six faculties) of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind.
g.325

sentient being
sems can

མས་ཅན།
sattva
Often rendered simply as “being.”
g.326

setting
rab tu ’dzin pa

རབ་་འན་པ།
pradhāraṇa
g.327

seven precious substances
rin po che sna bdun

ན་་་་བན།
saptaratna
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:

The set of seven precious materials or substances includes a range of
precious metals and gems, but their exact list varies. The set often consists of
gold, silver, beryl, crystal, red pearls, emeralds, and white coral, but may also
contain lapis lazuli, ruby, sapphire, chrysoberyl, diamonds, etc. The term is
frequently used in the sūtras to exemplify preciousness, wealth, and beauty,
and can describe treasures, offering materials, or the features of architectural
structures such as stūpas, palaces, thrones, etc. The set is also used to
describe the beauty and prosperity of buddha realms and the realms of the
gods.
In other contexts, the term saptaratna can also refer to the seven precious
possessions of a cakravartin or to a set of seven precious moral qualities.
g.328

sharing a common destiny
bde ba gcig pa’i don gyis

བ་བ་གག་པ་ན་ིས།
ekayogakṣemārthena
g.329

shift in one’s basis of existence
gnas gyur pa

གནས་ར་པ།
āśrayaparivṛtti
See n.191.
g.330

Single Vehicle
theg pa gcig pa

ག་པ་གག་པ།
ekayāna
g.331

six destinies
’gro ba drug

འོ་བ་ག
sadgati
The six destinies correspond to the six realms of Buddhist cosmogony (i.e.,
gods, demigods, humans, animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings).
g.332

slow-witted
blo gros ngan pa

་ོས་ངན་པ།

kumati
g.333

solitary realizer
rang sangs rgyas

རང་སངས་ས།
pratyekabuddha
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Literally, “buddha for oneself” or “solitary realizer.” Someone who, in his or
her last life, attains awakening entirely through their own contemplation,
without relying on a teacher. Unlike the awakening of a fully realized
buddha (samyaksambuddha), the accomplishment of a pratyekabuddha is not
regarded as final or ultimate. They attain realization of the nature of
dependent origination, the selflessness of the person, and a partial
realization of the selflessness of phenomena, by observing the suchness of
all that arises through interdependence. This is the result of progress in
previous lives but, unlike a buddha, they do not have the necessary merit,
compassion or motivation to teach others. They are named as “rhinoceroslike” (khaḍgaviṣāṇakalpa) for their preference for staying in solitude or as
“congregators” (vargacārin) when their preference is to stay among peers.
g.334

sovereign power
byin gyi rlabs

ན་ི་བས།
adhiṣṭhāna · adhiṣṭhita
This term is usually translated into English with “blessings.” However, as
explained in Edgerton 1953, p. 15; Eckel 1994, pp. 90–93; Gómez 2011, pp. 539
and 541; and Fiordalis 2012, pp. 104 and 118, adhiṣṭhāna conveys the notions
of control (of one’s environment as a result of meditative absorption),
authority, or protection (see Abhidharmakośa VII.51, cf. La Vallée Poussin 1925,
p. 119ff.). Adhiṣṭhāna is also used to convey the idea of transformation
through exerting one’s control over objects, people, and places. The term
“sovereign power” seems to cover all these shades of meaning as well as the
various usages of the Sanskrit term, for example satyādhiṣṭhāna “the sovereign
power of truth” and adhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭita “empowered by the sovereign power
(of the Tathāgata).”
g.335

space
nam mkha’

ནམ་མཁའ།

ākāśa
g.336

specific defining characteristic
rang gi mtshan nyid

རང་་མཚན་ད།
svalakṣaṇa
g.337

sphere of activity
spyod yul

ད་ལ།
gocara
Also translated here as “object of experience.”
g.338

spontaneously accomplished
lhun gyis grub pa

ན་ིས་བ་པ།
anābhoga
g.339

stage
sa

ས།
bhūmi
g.340

stage of engagement through aspiration
mos pa spyod pa’i sa

ས་པ་ད་པ་ས།
adhimukticaryābhūmiḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 897.
g.341

stainless
sbyangs pa

ངས་པ།
uttapta · viśuddha
g.342

Stainless
dri ma med pa

་མ་ད་པ།

vimalā
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.343

Subhūti
rab ’byor

རབ་འར།
subhūti
The name of a hearer.
g.344

subliminal
kun gzhi

ན་ག།
ālaya
See “subliminal cognition.”
g.345

subliminal cognition
kun gzhi rnam par shes pa

ན་ག་མ་པར་ས་པ།
ālayavijñāna
See Schmithausen’s groundbreaking work on the topic (1987 and 2014).
Schmithausen considers the ālayavijñāna to be “a continuous subliminal form
of mind” (Schmithausen 2014, p. 27).
g.346

subtle transgression
ltung ba phra mo

ང་བ་་།
sūkṣmāpatti
g.347

superficial
lpags shun

གས་ན།
—
Lit. “like the skin.”
g.348

superimpose
sgro btags

་བཏགས།

samāropa
g.349

superimposition
sgro ’dogs pa

་འགས་པ།
samāropa
g.350

superior knowledge
mngon par shes pa

མན་པར་ས་པ།
abhijñā
g.351

superior mind
lhag pa’i sems

ག་པ་མས།
adhicitta
g.352

sustenances
zas

ཟས།
āhāra
See “four kinds of sustenance.”
g.353

Suviśuddhamati
blo gros shin tu rnam dag

་ོས་ན་་མ་དག
suviśuddhamati
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.
g.354

tathāgata
de bzhin gshegs pa

་བན་གགས་པ།
tathāgata
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
A frequently used synonym for buddha. According to different explanations,
it can be read as tathā-gata, literally meaning “one who has thus gone,” or as
tathā-āgata, “one who has thus come.” Gata, though literally meaning “gone,”
is a past passive participle used to describe a state or condition of existence.

Tatha(tā), often rendered as “suchness” or “thusness,” is the quality or
condition of things as they really are, which cannot be conveyed in
conceptual, dualistic terms. Therefore, this epithet is interpreted in different
ways, but in general it implies one who has departed in the wake of the
buddhas of the past, or one who has manifested the supreme awakening
dependent on the reality that does not abide in the two extremes of existence
and quiescence. It is also often used as a specific epithet of the Buddha
Śākyamuni.
g.355

tatpuruṣa
—
—
tatpuruṣa
Type of Sanskrit compound.

g.356

teachings on the basis of serious downfalls
pham pa’i gnas lta bu’i chos · pham pa’i gnas lta bu

ཕམ་པ་གནས་་་ས། · ཕམ་པ་གནས་་།
pārājayikasthānīyadharmāḥ · pārājayikasthānīya
g.357

teachings on the basis of transgressions
ltung ba’i gnas lta bu’i chos

ང་བ་གནས་་་ས།
mananāpatti sthānīya[dharmāḥ]
g.358

teachings on the ceremony of taking [the vows of the
bodhisattva discipline]
[byang chub sems dpa’i tshul khrims kyi sdom pa] yang dag par blang ba

byang chub sems dpa'i tshul khrims kyi sdom pa་ཡང་དག་པར་ང་
བ།

[bodhisattvaśīlasaṃvara]samādāna
g.359

ten powers
stobs bcu

བས་བ།
daśabala

The ten powers (daśabala, stobs bcu) of the Tathāgata are (1) the power of
knowledge of what is possible and what is not possible (sthānāsthānajñānabala, gnas dang gnas ma yin pa mkhyen pa’i stobs); (2) the power of knowledge of
the individual results of actions (karmasvakajñānabala, las kyi rnam smin mkhyen
pa’i stobs); (3) the power of knowledge of different practices leading to
various destinies (sarvatragāminīpratipajjñānabala, thams cad du ’gro ba’i lam
mkhyen pa’i stobs); (4) the power of knowledge of the different dispositions
and tendencies of different beings (anekadhātunānādhātujñānabala, khams sna
tshogs mkhyen pa’i stobs); (5) the power of knowledge of the different
aspirations of beings (nānādhimuktijñānabala, mos pa sna tshogs mkhyen pa’i
stobs); (6) the power of knowledge of the different degrees of development of
the faculties and inclinations of beings (indriyaparāparyajñānabala, dbang po
mchog dang mchog ma yin pa mkhyen pa’i stobs); (7) the power of knowledge of
the absorptions, deliverances, concentrations, and attainments (dhyānavimokṣasamādhisamāpattijñānabala, bsam gtan dang rnam thar dang ting nge ’dzin
dang snyoms par ’jug pa thams cad mkhyen pa’i stobs); (8) the power of
knowledge of previous lives (pūrvanivāsajñānabala, sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran
pa mkhyen pa’i stobs); (9) the power of knowledge of the deaths and births of
beings according to their actions (cyutyupapādajñānabala, ’chi ’pho bo dang skye
ba mkhyen pa’i stobs); and (10) the power of knowledge of the destruction of
the impurities (āsravakṣayajñānabala, zag pa zad pa mkhyen pa’i stobs). (Rahula
2001: 229–230, n118).
g.360

that which must be established
grub par bya ba

བ་པར་་བ།
sādhya
g.361

the sublime perfection, the supreme indivisible gnosis of the
Tathāgata’s liberation
de bzhin gshegs pa ma ’dres pa’i rnam par thar par mdzad pa’i ye shes kyi mthar phyin
pa

་བན་གགས་པ་མ་འས་པ་མ་པར་ཐར་པར་མཛད་པ་་ས་་མཐར་ན་པ།
asaṃbhinnatathāgatavimokṣajñānaniṣṭhāgataḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 368.
g.362

thesis
so so’i shes pa · dam bcas

་ ་ས་པ། · དམ་བཅས།

pratijñā
g.363

thing
dngos po · ngo bo

དས་། · ་།
bhāva
Also translated here as “object.”
g.364

thinks
bye brag phyed pa

་ག་ད་པ།
mata
g.365

those not following you
slad rol pa

ད་ལ་པ།
tīrthika
g.366

thought
yid

ད།
manas
Regarding the term “thought” as a translation for the Sanskrit manas, see
Schmithausen 2014.
g.367

three forms of knowledge
rigs pa gsum

གས་པ་གམ།
trividyā
The three knowledges are the superior knowledge that is the realization of
the recollection of former states (pūrvanivāsanānusmṛtisākṣātkārābhijñā ), the
superior knowledge that is the realization of death and rebirth
(cyutyupapādasākṣātkārābhijñā), and the superior knowledge that is the
realization of the cessation of outflows (āsravakṣayasākṣātkārābhijñā). See
Powers 1995, p. 316, n. 17.
g.368

three worlds
khams gsum

ཁམས་གམ།
tridhātu · traidhātuka
The three worlds are: the desire realm (kāmadhātu, ’dod khams), form realm
(rūpadhātu, gzugs khams) and the formless realm (ārūpyadhātu, gzugs med
khams). These three worlds include all of saṃsāra.
g.369

timira
rab rib pa

རབ་བ་པ།
timira
The timira disease includes a variety of eye disorders including myopia,
cataract, etc. In the context of Buddhist texts, this term is used to refer to eye
floaters (i.e., spots, specks, or strings appearing in one’s visual field). This
eye disorder is called myodesopsia or muscae volitantes (Latin for “flying flies”).
g.370

to be comprehended
yongs su shes par bya ba’i dngos po

ངས་་ས་པར་་བ་དས་།
parijñeyavastu
g.371

trichiliocosm
stong gsum gyi stong chen po’i ’jig rten gyi khams

ང་གམ་ི་ང་ན་ ་འག་ན་ི་ཁམས།
trisāhasra mahāssāhasralokadhātu
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
The largest universe described in Buddhist cosmology. This term, in
Abhidharma cosmology, refers to 1,000³ world systems, i.e., 1,000
“dichiliocosms” or “two thousand great thousand world realms” (dvisāhasramahāsāhasralokadhātu), which are in turn made up of 1,000 first-order world
systems, each with its own Mount Sumeru, continents, sun and moon, etc.
g.372

true nature
’di ltar don

འ་ར་ན།
yathārtha
g.373

true reality
de bzhin nyid · de kho na · de nyid

་བན་ད། · ་་ན། · ་ད།
tathatā · tattva
The true state or nature of things. See also n.97.
g.374

truly
ji tsam du

་ཙམ་།
yāvat · tāvatā · tāvat
g.375

truth
bden pa

བན་པ།
satya
See the “two truths” and “four noble truths.”
g.376

truth body
chos kyi sku

ས་་།
dharmakāya
g.377

two truths
bden pa gnyis

བན་པ་གས།
satyadvaya
The ultimate and relative, or conventional, truth.
g.378

ultimate
don dam pa · don dam

ན་དམ་པ། · ན་དམ།
paramārtha
The ultimate is said to be inexpressible, nondual, transcending speculation,
transcending difference and sameness, and of a single nature (i.e.,
anabhilāpya, advaya, sarvatarkasamatikrānta, bhedābhedasamatikrānta, ekarasa).
g.379

ultimate limit of existence
yang dag pa’i mtha’

ཡང་དག་པ་མཐའ།

bhūtakoṭi
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
This term has three meanings: (1) the ultimate nature, (2) the experience of
the ultimate nature, and (3) the quiescent state of a worthy one (arhat) to be
avoided by bodhisattvas.
g.380

ultimate reality
de bzhin nyid don dam pa

་བན་ད་ན་དམ་པ།
—
g.381

ultimate within the domain of truth
chos kyi dbyings kyis klas pa

ས་་དངས་ས་ས་པ།
dharmadhātuparamaḥ
Mahāvyutpatti 6429.
g.382

unborn
ma skyes pa

མ་ས་པ།
anutpanna
g.383

unconditioned
’du ma byas

འ་མ་ས།
asaṃskṛta
g.384

underlying condition
gnas pa

གནས་པ།
sthāna
See Edgerton 1953, p. 579.
g.385

understood all practices
spyod pa thams cad dang ldan pa’i blo

ད་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་ན་པ་།
sarvacaryāsamanvāgatabuddhiḥ

Mahāvyutpatti 363.
g.386

unite them evenly
zung du ’jug pa

ང་་འག་པ།
yuganaddha
g.387

universe of a thousand worlds
stong gi ’jig rten gyi khams

ང་་འག་ན་ི་ཁམས།
sāhasracūḍikalokadhātu
g.388

unproduced by intentional action
mngon par ’du bya ba med pa

མན་པར་འ་་བ་ད་པ།
anabhisaṃskāraṇa · anabhisaṃskāra
The term has a double connotation: (1) “without effort” and (2) “unproduced
(or brought about) by causes and conditions.” See Edgerton 1953, p. 21.
g.389

unreal
yongs su ma grub pa

ངས་་མ་བ་པ།
apariniṣpanna
lack of [any] actuality, no actuality, deprived of any actuality, devoid of any
actuality
g.390

unsurpassable good
grub pa dang bde ba

བ་པ་དང་བ་བ།
yogakṣema
See Edgerton 1953, p. 448,1–2; Tillemans 1997, p. 157ff. Lamotte translates
this term with ‘…de sécurité suprême’; see Lamotte 1935, p. 175.
g.391

useful
gces spras byed pa

གས་ས་ད་པ།
bahukara

See Edgerton 1953, p. 398.
g.392

Utmost Joy
rab tu dga’ ba

རབ་་དགའ་བ།
pramuditā
The name of a bodhisattva stage.
g.393

Uttarakuru
byang gi sgra mi snyan pa

ང་་་་ན་པ།
uttarakuru
The name of the northern continent of Jambudvīpa where people live in
perfect harmony. See Bhattacharya 2000.
g.394

valid
yongs su dag pa

ངས་་དག་པ།
pariśuddha
g.395

valid cognition
tshad ma

ཚད་མ།
pramāṇa
g.396

Vārāṇasī
bA rA Na sI

་་ཎ་།
vārāṇasī
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
Also known as Benares, one of the oldest cities of northeast India on the
banks of the Ganges, in modern-day Uttar Pradesh. It was once the capital of
the ancient kingdom of Kāśi, and in the Buddha’s time it had been absorbed
into the kingdom of Kośala. It was an important religious center, as well as a
major city, even during the time of the Buddha. The name may derive from
being where the Varuna and Assi rivers flow into the Ganges. It was on the

outskirts of Vārāṇasī that the Buddha first taught the Dharma, in the location
known as Deer Park (Mṛgadāva). For numerous episodes set in Vārāṇasī,
including its kings, see The Hundred Deeds, Toh 340.
g.397

Vidhivatparipṛcchaka
tshul bzhin kun ’dri

ལ་བན་ན་འ།
vidhivatparipṛcchaka
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.
g.398

vigor
brtson ’grus

བན་འས།
vīrya
Also translated here as “diligence.”
g.399

vipakṣa
—
—
vipakṣa
Technical term in Buddhist logic.

g.400

Viśālakīrti
—
—
viśālakīrti
The name of a tathāgata

g.401

Viśālamati
blo gros yangs pa

་ོས་ཡངས་པ།
viśālamati
A bodhisattva mahāsattva.
g.402

vow
sdom pa

མ་པ།
saṃvara

g.403

wander like beggars
spongs zhing rgyu

ངས་ང་།
caraṃti bhikṣāṃ
g.404

wavering
rgyu ba med pa

་བ་ད་པ།
apracāra
g.405

whose defining characteristic is beyond all speculation
rtog ge thams cad las yang dag par ’das pa

ག་་ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་ཡང་དག་པར་འདས་པ།
sarvatarkasamatikrānta
g.406

whose defining characteristic is of a single nature everywhere
thams cad du ro gcig pa’i mtshan nyid

ཐམས་ཅད་་་གག་པ་མཚན་ད།
*sarvatraikarasalakṣaṇa
g.407

wisdom
shes rab

ས་རབ།
prajñā
g.408

wishlessness
smon pa med pa

ན་པ་ད་པ།
apraṇihita
One of the three gates of liberation along with appearancelessness and
emptiness.
g.409

with outflows
zag pa dang bcas pa

ཟག་པ་དང་བཅས་པ།
sāsrava
See Edgerton 1953, p. 102.

g.410

without a person
zag med

ཟག་ད།
anāsrava
g.411

without support
mi gnas pa

་གནས་པ།
apratiṣṭhita
g.412

wrongly conceive
mngon par zhen

མན་པར་ན།
abhiniviśanti
See Edgerton 1953, p. 53. The term has various shades of meaning such as
“to be attached to,” “to adhere to,” “to wrongly conceive,” “to hold fast to,”
and “to believe in” with a negative connotation.
g.413

yakṣa
—
—
yakṣa
Definition from the 84000 Glossary of Terms:
A class of nonhuman beings who inhabit forests, mountainous areas, and
other natural spaces, or serve as guardians of villages and towns, and may
be propitiated for health, wealth, protection, and other boons, or controlled
through magic. According to tradition, their homeland is in the north, where
they live under the rule of the Great King Vaiśravaṇa.
Several members of this class have been deified as gods of wealth (these
include the just-mentioned Vaiśravaṇa) or as bodhisattva generals of yakṣa
armies, and have entered the Buddhist pantheon in a variety of forms,
including, in tantric Buddhism, those of wrathful deities.

g.414

yoga
sbyor ba

ར་བ།
yoga

