CHAPTER 5

5.1

Then, the bodhisattva Viśālamati asked the Blessed One, “Blessed One,
when bodhisattvas who are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and
cognition are called ‘skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition,’
what does it mean?101 When they are designated in this way, what does it
refer to?”
The Blessed One answered, “Viśālamati, you are asking this for the benefit
and happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the
welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, including gods and humans.
Your intention is excellent when questioning the Tathāgata on this specific
point. Therefore, listen, Viśālamati. I will explain to you in which way
bodhisattvas are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition.
“Viśālamati, when such and such beings are reborn and manifest102 in this

5.2

saṃsāra comprised of six destinies, in any class of beings or state of birth, be
it

egg-born,
103

generated,

womb-born,

moisture-born,

[F.12.b]

or

spontaneously

there is first a twofold appropriation: the appropriation of the

physical sense faculties together with their supports, and the appropriation
of mental imprints producing the elaboration of conventional expressions
with regard to phenomenal appearances, names, and conceptualizations. In
dependence upon this twofold appropriation, the mind containing all the
seeds matures, merges [with the embryo], grows, increases, and expands.104
This twofold appropriation occurs in the realm of form but it does not appear
in the realm of the formless.105
5.3

“Viśālamati, this cognition is also called ‘appropriating cognition’ because
it grasps and appropriates the body. It is also called ‘subliminal cognition,’
because it dwells and lies hidden in this body, sharing a common destiny. It
is also called ‘mind,’ because it is accumulated106 and developed by visual
forms, sounds, smells, flavors, tangible objects, and phenomena.107

5.4

“Viśālamati, taking this appropriating cognition as support and basis, the
six kinds of cognition,108 that is, visual, auditive, olfactory, gustatory, tactile,
and mental cognitions, arise. Among these, a visual cognition arises on the
basis of the eye, which is connected with a visual cognition and a visual
form. Simultaneously and in conformity with this visual cognition, a mental
cognition that conceptualizes the object arises at the same time, having the
same object. [Likewise,] Viśālamati, an auditive, olfactory, gustatory, or
tactile cognition arises on the basis of a sense faculty connected to a
cognition, such as the ear, nose, tongue, or body, and a sound, smell, flavor,
or tangible object. Simultaneously and in conformity with this auditive,
olfactory, gustatory, or tactile

cognition, a

mental cognition

that

conceptualizes the object arises at the same time, having the same object. If
only one visual cognition arises at one time, [F.13.a] then only one mental
cognition that conceptualizes the object arises simultaneously, having the
same object. If two, three, four, or five cognitions arise simultaneously, then
also in that case, having the same object as the group of five cognitions, only
one mental cognition that conceptualizes this object arises simultaneously.109
5.5

“Viśālamati, it is like this: If the conditions for the arising of a single wave
in a large stream of water are present, then only one wave arises.110 If the
conditions for the arising of two or many waves are present, then two or
many waves arise.111 However, the river [itself] neither stops as a stream of
water nor becomes exhausted. If the conditions for the arising of a single
reflection in a perfectly polished mirror are present, then only one reflection
arises.112 If the conditions for the arising of two or many reflections are
present, then two or many reflections arise.113 However, the mirror neither
transforms itself into the object corresponding to the reflection nor manifests
reflections by being in close contact [with the reflected objects].114
Viśālamati, similarly, taking this appropriating cognition as support and
basis, as in the examples of the river and the mirror, if the conditions for the
arising of one visual cognition are present, then only one visual cognition
arises. If the conditions for the simultaneous arising of up to five cognitions
are present, then up to five cognitions simultaneously arise.

5.6

“Viśālamati, taking in this way the knowledge 115 of this doctrine as a
support and basis, bodhisattvas are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought,
and cognition. Yet, when the Tathāgata designates [F.13.b] the bodhisattvas
as skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and cognition, they are not
designated as completely skilled merely on account of this. Viśālamati, I call
bodhisattvas ‘skilled in the ultimate’ as soon as 116 they, by themselves and in
their own experience,117 neither perceive the appropriation nor the
appropriating cognition but [instead perceive] in accordance with the truth;
as soon as they neither perceive the subliminal nor the subliminal cognition;

neither the accumulated nor the mind;118 neither the eye, nor the form, nor
the visual cognition; neither the ear, nor the sound, nor the auditive
cognition; neither the nose, nor the smell, nor the olfactory cognition; neither
the tongue, nor the flavor, nor the gustatory cognition; and neither the body,
nor the tangible object, nor the tactile cognition. Viśālamati, I call
bodhisattvas ‘skilled in the ultimate’ as soon as they, by themselves and in
their own experience, neither perceive thought, nor phenomena, nor mental
cognition but instead perceive in accordance with the truth. Viśālamati, the
Tathāgata designates as skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and
cognition the bodhisattvas who are skilled in the ultimate. Viśālamati, for
this reason, bodhisattvas are skilled in the secrets of mind, thought, and
cognition. Also, when the Tathāgata designates them as such, it is for this
reason.”
5.7

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“Profound and subtle is the appropriating cognition.
Containing all the seeds, it flows like a stream of water.
I did not teach it to the immature,
Lest they would imagine it to be a self.”119
This was the chapter of Viśālamati—[F.14.a] the fifth chapter.

6.

