CHAPTER 3

3.1

Then the bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati addressed the Blessed One, “Blessed
One, at an earlier time, you spoke these words: ‘The ultimate is subtle and
profound. Characterized as transcending what is distinct or indistinct74 [from
conditioned phenomena], it is difficult to understand.’ How wonderful
indeed are these words of yours! Blessed One, regarding this point, I once
saw many bodhisattvas who, having attained the stage of engagement
through aspiration,75 assembled in one place to discuss in the following way
whether conditioned phenomena and the ultimate are distinct or indistinct.
Among them, some declared, ‘The defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are indistinct.’76
Others replied, ‘It is not the case that the defining characteristic of
conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are
indistinct, for they are distinct indeed.’ [F.7.a] Some others, who were
perplexed and lacked certainty, said, ‘Some pretend that the defining
characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of
the ultimate are distinct. Some pretend that they are indistinct. Which
bodhisattvas speak the truth? Which speak falsity? Which are mistaken?
Which are not?’ Blessed One, I thought to myself, ‘So, none of these noble
sons understands the ultimate whose subtle defining characteristic
transcends whether it is distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena.
These bodhisattvas are truly77 naive, confused, dull, unskilled, and
mistaken.’ ”

3.2

The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati, “So it is, Suviśuddhamati. So it is. Indeed, none of these noble sons understands the
ultimate whose subtle defining characteristic transcends whether it is
distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena. These [bodhisattvas] are
truly naive, confused, dull, unskilled, and mistaken. Why is this so? Suviśuddhamati, it is because those who analyze conditioned phenomena in
this way neither realize nor actualize the ultimate.

3.3

“Why? Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were indistinct,
[even] spiritually immature people —all ordinary beings —would, as a
consequence, realize the truth. As mere ordinary beings,78 [F.7.b] not only
would they attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good,79 but they would also
fully and completely awaken to unsurpassable complete and perfect
awakening.
“If the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate were distinct, even those who realize the truth
would, as a consequence, not be detached from the phenomenal
appearances of conditioned phenomena. Since they would not be detached
from the phenomenal appearances of conditioned phenomena, they would
also not be liberated from the bondage of phenomenal appearances. If they
were not liberated from the bondage of phenomenal appearances, they
would not be liberated from the bondage of corruption. If they were not
liberated from these two kinds of bondage, those who realize the truth
would neither attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, nor fully and
completely awaken to the unsurpassable complete and perfect awakening.
“Suviśuddhamati, ordinary beings do not realize the truth and,80 as mere
ordinary beings, neither do they attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, nor
do they fully and completely awaken to the unsurpassable complete and
perfect awakening. For these reasons, it is not correct to say that the defining
characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of
the ultimate are indistinct. Regarding this point, you should know through
this approach that those who consider the defining characteristic of
conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate to be
indistinct are not right but wrong.
“Suviśuddhamati, it is not the case that those who realize the truth are not
detached from the phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena, for
they are indeed detached from it.81 Neither are they not liberated from the
bondage of phenomenal appearance, for they are indeed liberated from it.
Nor are they not liberated from the bondage of corruption, for they are
indeed liberated from it. Since they are liberated from these two kinds of
bondage, [F.8.a] not only do they attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable good, but
they will also fully and completely awaken to the unsurpassable complete
and perfect awakening.82 For all these reasons, it is not correct to say that the
defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate are distinct. Regarding this point, you should
know through this approach that those who consider the defining
characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of
the ultimate to be distinct are not right but wrong.

3.4

“Moreover, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were indistinct,
then, just as the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena is
encompassed by the defining characteristic of affliction, so too would the
defining characteristic of the ultimate be included in the defining
characteristic of affliction.
“However, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were distinct,
then the defining characteristic of the ultimate could not be the universal
defining characteristic within all the defining characteristics of conditioned
phenomena.
“Suviśuddhamati, the defining characteristic of the ultimate is not
encompassed by the defining characteristic of affliction, and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate is the universal defining characteristic within all
the defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena. For these reasons, it
is not correct to say that the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are either
indistinct or distinct. Regarding this point, you should know through this
approach that those pretending that the defining characteristic of
conditioned phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate are
indistinct or distinct are not right but wrong.

3.5

“Moreover, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were not distinct,
[F.8.b] then, just as the defining characteristic of the ultimate is not specific to
any defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena, so too would all
defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena not be specific to any
conditioned phenomenon, and yogis would also not look for the ultimate
beyond whatever they see, hear, distinguish, or know with regard to
conditioned phenomena.83
“However, Suviśuddhamati, if the defining characteristic of conditioned
phenomena and the defining characteristic of the ultimate were distinct,
then, the mere selflessness and essencelessness of conditioned phenomena
would not be the defining characteristic of the ultimate. The defining
characteristic of affliction and the defining characteristic of purity
themselves would be simultaneously established as distinct defining
characteristics of conditioned phenomena.
“Suviśuddhamati, the defining characteristics of conditioned phenomena
are specific and not unspecific to conditioned phenomena; yogis do look for
the ultimate beyond whatever they see, hear, distinguish, or know with
regard to conditioned phenomena; the ultimate is indeed characterized by
the mere selflessness and essencelessness of conditioned phenomena; and

the defining characteristic of affliction and the defining characteristic of
purity also are not simultaneously established as distinct defining
characteristics of conditioned phenomena. For all these reasons, it is not
correct to say that the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and
the defining characteristic of the ultimate are neither indistinct nor distinct.
Regarding this point, you should know through these approaches that those
pretending that the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and
the defining characteristic of the ultimate are indistinct or distinct are not
right but wrong.
3.6

“Suviśuddhamati, it is like this: It is not easy to decide 84 whether the
whiteness of the conch is distinct or indistinct from the defining
characteristic of the conch, likewise with the yellowness of gold. It is not
easy to decide whether the quality of the sound produced by a vīṇā is [F.9.a]
distinct or indistinct from the defining characteristic of sound, likewise with
aloe and its fragrance, pepper and its heat, myrobalan and its astringency,
cotton and its softness, and clarified butter and butter. Thus it is not easy to
decide whether the impermanence of all conditioned phenomena is distinct
or indistinct from the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena,
likewise with the suffering of all beings with outflows and the defining
characteristic of beings with outflows, as well as the selflessness of all
phenomena and the defining characteristic of phenomena.
“Suviśuddhamati, it is like this: It is not easy to decide whether the
defining characteristic of restless desire and the defining characteristic of
afflictions are distinct or indistinct from the defining characteristic of desire.
You should know it is just like this with anger and delusion too. Likewise,
Suviśuddhamati, you should not see anything good85 in deciding whether
the defining characteristic of conditioned phenomena and the defining
characteristic of the ultimate are distinct or indistinct. In this way, Suviśuddhamati, I have completely and fully awakened to the ultimate that is
subtle, extremely subtle, [profound], extremely profound, difficult to
understand, extremely difficult to understand, and characterized as
transcending being distinct or indistinct from conditioned phenomena.86 Yet,
after I attained complete and perfect awakening, I communicated through
words, gave explanations, established distinctions, expressed myself
through conventions, and [F.9.b] imparted teachings.”87

3.7

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“The defining characteristics of the domains of conditioned phenomena and
of the ultimate
Are free from being distinct or indistinct.88
Those who imagine them to be distinct or indistinct are mistaken.

“As beings practice mental stillness and insight,
They will be liberated from the bonds of corruption
And the bonds of phenomenal appearance.”89
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Suviśuddhamati—the third chapter.

4.

