Prologue
[F.1.b]

p.1

Homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas!
Thus did I hear at one time. The Blessed One was dwelling in an
unfathomable palace, built with the blazing seven precious substances,34
that emitted35 great light rays suffusing countless universes.36 Each of its
rooms was well arranged and its design was infinite. It was the undivided
maṇḍala, the domain transcending the three worlds. Arising from the
supreme roots of virtue of the one who transcends the world,37 it was
characterized by the perfectly pure cognition of the one who has achieved
complete mastery.38 Abode of the Tathāgata where the assembly of
innumerable bodhisattvas gathered, it was attended by countless gods,
nāgas, [F.2.a] yakṣas, gandharvas, demigods, garuḍas, kinnaras, mahoragas,
humans, and nonhumans. Supported by the great joy and bliss of savoring
the Dharma and designed to accomplish the complete welfare of all beings, it
was free of any harm caused by the stains of afflictions and clear of any
demon. Surpassing all manifestations, this unfathomable palace was
displayed by the sovereign power of the Tathāgata. Mindfulness,
intelligence, and realization were its pathway;39 mental stillness and insight
were the vehicle leading to it; the great gates of liberation—emptiness,
appearancelessness, and wishlessness —were its entrance. It was set on
foundations adorned with an infinite accumulation of excellent qualities,
which were like great kings of jeweled lotuses.40

p.2

The Blessed One had a perfectly realized mind and was free from dualistic
behavior. Absorbed in the Dharma of the nonexistence of defining
characteristics, he was residing in the domain of the buddhas. He had
attained equality with all buddhas. His realization was unobstructed and his
qualities 41 were irreversible. He could not be overcome by objects of
experience.42 His abode was inconceivable.43 Perfectly skilled in the

sameness of the three times,44 his five bodies were present in all worlds. His
knowledge of all phenomena was free from doubt. He understood all
practices. His knowledge of phenomena was without uncertainty. [F.2.b] His
body was unimaginable. He possessed the gnosis bodhisattvas vow to
accomplish.45 He had attained the nondual abode of the buddhas, the
sublime perfection, the supreme indivisible gnosis of the Tathāgata’s
liberation.46 He had realized the sameness [of all phenomena], the state of a
buddha in which there is neither a center nor a periphery,47 and reached the
ultimate within the domain of truth, the point where the sphere of space
ends.48
p.3

The Blessed One was accompanied by the entire immeasurable assembly
of hearers. Children of noble family, they were the heirs of the Buddha. Their
minds were liberated, their wisdom was emancipated, and their discipline
was completely pure. They happily gathered with those who longed for the
Dharma. They had heard much, kept in mind what they had heard, and
accumulated [merit from] what they had heard. They excelled in thought,
speech, and deeds. Their wisdom was swift, quick, sharp, emancipating,49
discerning,50 vast, extensive, profound, and unequaled. They possessed the
jewel of wisdom and the three forms of knowledge. They had attained the
supreme state of happiness in this life. The purity of their merit,51 the
excellence of their peaceful conduct, their patience, and their gentleness
were vast.52 They were fully engaged in the teaching of the Tathāgata.

p.4

The Blessed One was also accompanied by all the innumerable
bodhisattvas assembled from various buddha realms. Firmly settled and
engaged in a vast state, they had gone forth through the Dharma of the
Great Vehicle. Impartial toward all beings, they were free from all
conceptions, conceptualizations, and fabrications. Victorious over all demons
and opposition, they were not involved with the considerations of the
hearers and solitary realizers. [F.3.a] Steadfast through the great joy and
happiness of savoring the Dharma, they were free from the five great fears.
Solely progressing toward the stages from which there is no regression, they
had perfectly actualized the stage in which one pacifies the torment of
beings. Among them were thus the bodhisattva mahāsattvas Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana, Vidhivatparipṛcchaka, Dharmodgata, Suviśuddhamati,
Viśālamati, Guṇākara, Paramārthasamudgata, Āryāvalokiteśvara, Maitreya,
and Mañjuśrī.

1.

CHAPTER 1

1.1

At that time, the bodhisattva Vidhivatparipṛcchaka questioned the
bodhisattva Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana on the ultimate whose defining
characteristic is inexpressible and nondual:53 “O son of the Victorious One,
when it is said that all phenomena are nondual, what are these phenomena?
In what way are they nondual?”
Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana replied, “Noble son, all phenomena, what
we refer to as all phenomena, are of just two kinds: conditioned and
unconditioned. With respect to these, the conditioned is neither conditioned
nor unconditioned. The unconditioned is neither unconditioned nor
conditioned.”

1.2

Vidhivatparipṛcchaka inquired, “O son of the Victorious One, why is the
conditioned neither conditioned nor unconditioned and the unconditioned
neither unconditioned nor conditioned?”
Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana

answered,

“Noble

son,

the

term

conditioned is a word, a label used by the Teacher. Words that are labels used
by the Teacher are conventional expressions arising from imagination. These
conventional expressions arising from imagination are always unreal54
conventional expressions arising from imagination in its diversity. Therefore,
the term conditioned is not the conditioned. [F.3.b] Noble son, the term
unconditioned is also included within conventions, just as expressions other
than conditioned and unconditioned are and will [always] be. One might object
that there is, however, no expression in the absence of the object [to which it
refers]. What is then this object? It is the complete and perfect awakening to
inexpressible [reality] through the sublime gnosis and vision55 of the noble
ones.56 But in order57 to lead [others] to the perfect realization of this very
inexpressible nature of phenomena, the Teacher labels this object with the
term conditioned.

1.3

“Noble son, the term unconditioned is also a word, a label used by the
Teacher. Words that are labels used by the Teacher are conventional
expressions arising from imagination.58 These conventional expressions
arising from imagination are always conventional expressions deprived of
any actuality that arise from imagination in its diversity. Therefore, the term
unconditioned is not the unconditioned. Noble son, the term conditioned is also
included within conventions, just as expressions other than conditioned and
unconditioned are and will [always] be. One might object that there is,
however, no expression in the absence of the object [to which it refers]. What
is then this object? It is the complete and perfect awakening to inexpressible
[reality] through the sublime gnosis and vision of the noble ones. But in
order to lead [others] to the perfect realization of this very inexpressible
nature of phenomena, the Teacher labels this object with the term
unconditioned.”

1.4

Vidhivatparipṛcchaka asked, “O son of the Victorious One, as the noble
ones completely and perfectly awaken to inexpressible [reality] through
their sublime gnosis and perception, why do they [F.4.a] label this object
with the terms conditioned and unconditioned in order to lead [others] to the
perfect realization of this very inexpressible nature of phenomena?”
Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana replied, “Noble son, it is like the
following example: A magician or his skillful apprentice, finding himself at
the juncture of four great roads, assembles grass, leaves, twigs, pebbles, or
stones and produces all kinds of magic illusions, such as regiments of
elephants, horses, chariots, and soldiers or collections of jewels, pearls, beryl,
seashells, crystal, and coral, as well as an abundance of wealth and grain in
treasuries and granaries. At that time, in the presence of these illusions,
those who are naive, slow-witted, or confused, not perceiving the grass,
leaves, twigs, pebbles, or stones, see and hear those magical tricks and think
that whatever appears exists —that these regiments of elephants, horses,
chariots, and soldiers or collections of jewels, pearls, beryl, seashells, crystal,
and coral, as well as this abundance of wealth and grain, treasuries and
granaries, exist. Clinging to these magical illusions according to the way
they see and hear things and strongly believing in them, they express
themselves through conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is
false.’ They still need to examine these illusions.
“Those who are not naive or confused but have wisdom perceive the
grass, leaves, twigs, pebbles, or stones. They see and hear those magical
tricks and understand that whatever appears does not exist—that these
regiments of elephants, horses, chariots, and soldiers or collections of jewels,
pearls, beryl, seashells, crystal, and coral, as well as this abundance of wealth
and grain, treasuries and granaries, do not exist. [F.4.b] Yet, they understand

that the conception of an elephant regiment exists since its manifestation as
a conception through an expedient59 exists, as do the manifestations as
conceptions of regiments of horses, chariots, and soldiers or collections of
jewels, pearls, beryl, seashells, crystal, and coral, as well as this abundance of
wealth and grain, treasuries and granaries, together with other similar
manifestations. So they understand that all those magical illusions, these
magic illusions deceiving the eye, exist [in the way magical illusions do].60
Thinking in this way, [these wise beings] do not express themselves through
conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is false,’ on account of
clinging to these magical illusions in the way they see and hear things and
thus strongly believing in them.61 However, they do express themselves
through conventions in order to convey the true nature 62 [of these illusions
to others], although they do not need to further examine these illusions.63
1.5

Likewise, some childish or ordinary beings have not attained the
transcendent sublime wisdom. They have not understood that the nature of
all phenomena is inexpressible. When those beings perceive conditioned
and unconditioned phenomena, they believe that whatever appears as a
conditioned or unconditioned phenomenon exists, and they express
themselves through conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is
false,’ on account of clinging to these appearances according to the way they
see and hear things and thus strongly believing in them. They still need to
examine these appearances.
“With regard to this, some beings who are not childish and have seen the
truth have attained the transcendent sublime wisdom. They have
understood that the nature of all phenomena is inexpressible. When they
perceive conditioned and unconditioned phenomena, they believe that
whatever appears as a conditioned or unconditioned phenomenon does not
exist. However, with respect to these appearances, they think that the
conceptions in terms of conditioned and unconditioned, [F.5.a] the
manifestation of conceptions through an expedient in terms of conditioned
and

unconditioned,

the

occurrence

of

conceptualization,

and

the

phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena exist in the way magical
illusions do. That which deludes the mind exists [in the way magical
illusions do].64 Thinking in that way, they do not express themselves
through conventions, such as ‘This one is true but the other is false,’ on
account of clinging to these appearances according to the way they see and
hear things and thus strongly believing in them. However, they do express
themselves through conventions in order to convey the true nature [of these
appearances to others], although they do not need to further examine these
appearances.

“Noble son, the noble ones are thus completely and perfectly awakened to
inexpressible [reality] through their sublime gnosis and vision of this object,
but in order to lead [others] to the perfect realization of this very
inexpressible nature of phenomena, they label this object with the terms
conditioned and unconditioned.”
1.6

At that time, the bodhisattva Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana recited these
verses:
“The profound, which is inaccessible to foolish beings,
Inexpressible and nondual, has been taught by the Victorious One.
Yet, fools deluded by ignorance
Take delight in mental elaborations and dwell on duality.
“Deprived of understanding, afflicted by misunderstanding,
They will be reborn as sheep or oxen.
Casting aside the words of the wise,
They will wander in saṃsāra for a great length of time.”
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Gambhīrārthasaṃdhinirmocana—the first
chapter.

2.

