CHAPTER 7

7.1

At that time, the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata asked the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, when I was alone in a secluded place, I had the following
thought: ‘The Blessed One also spoke in many ways of the defining
characteristic specific to the five aggregates, mentioning the defining
characteristic

of
137

comprehension.

their

arising,

disintegration,

abandonment,

and

In the same way, he spoke of the twelve sense domains,

dependent arising, and the four kinds of sustenance. The Blessed One also
spoke in many ways of the defining characteristic of the four noble truths,
mentioning the comprehension of suffering, the abandoning of the cause of
suffering, the actualization of the cessation of suffering, and the practice of
the path. The Blessed One also spoke in many ways of the defining
characteristic specific to the eighteen constituents, mentioning their
varieties, manifoldness, abandonment, and comprehension. The Blessed One
also spoke in many ways of the defining characteristic specific to the four
applications of mindfulness, mentioning their adverse factors, antidotes,
practice, their arising from being non-arisen, their remaining after they arose,
and their maintaining, resuming, or increasing. Similarly, he also spoke in
many ways of the defining characteristic specific to the four correct selfrestraints, the four bases of supernatural powers, the five faculties, the five
forces, and the seven branches of awakening. [F.16.b] The Blessed One also
spoke in many ways of the defining characteristic specific to the eight
branches of the path, mentioning their adverse factors, antidotes, and
practices, their arising from being non-arisen and remaining after they arose,
and their maintaining, resuming, or increasing.’
“When the Blessed One further said, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence,138 unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’ what was the underlying intent of the
Blessed One? I would like to ask the Blessed One about this point: what was

the Blessed One thinking when he said, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally
in the state of nirvāṇa’?”
7.2

The Blessed One replied to the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata, “Paramārthasamudgata,

this

reflection

of

yours

arose

virtuously

and

appropriately. It is excellent indeed. You are asking this for the benefit and
happiness of many beings, out of compassion for the world, and for the
welfare, benefit, and happiness of all beings, including gods and humans.
Your intention is excellent when questioning the Tathāgata on this specific
point. Therefore, listen, Paramārthasamudgata. I will explain to you what my
underlying intent was when I declared, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, [F.17.a] primordially in the state of peace, and
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’139
7.3

“Paramārthasamudgata, the essencelessness of all phenomena has three
aspects. Having in mind essencelessness regarding defining characteristics,
essencelessness regarding arising, and essencelessness regarding the
ultimate, I thus taught what is called the essencelessness of all phenomena.

7.4

“Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena
with regard to defining characteristics? It is the imaginary defining
characteristic [of phenomena]. Why? Because as much as this defining
characteristic is nominally and conventionally posited, it is not posited140 on
the basis of an essence or a distinctive [characteristic].141 Therefore, it is
called the essencelessness of all phenomena with regard to defining characteristics.

7.5

“Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena
with regard to arising? It is the other-dependent defining characteristic of
phenomena. Why? Because this is [the defining characteristic] arising on
account of causes other [than itself] and not by itself. Therefore, it is called
essencelessness with regard to arising.

7.6

“Paramārthasamudgata, what is the essencelessness of all phenomena
with regard to the ultimate? Phenomena arising in dependence upon causes,
which lack an essence on account of lacking an essence in terms of arising
and also lack an essence on account of lacking an ultimate essence. Why?
Because, Paramārthasamudgata, I showed that the referential object
conducive to purification within phenomena is the ultimate, but the otherdependent defining characteristic is not the referential object conducive to
purification. Therefore, this essencelessness is called essencelessness with regard
to the ultimate.
“Moreover, Paramārthasamudgata, the actual defining characteristic of
phenomena should also be referred to as essencelessness with regard to the
ultimate.

Why?

Because,

Paramārthasamudgata,

the

selflessness

of

phenomena is called the essencelessness of phenomena, which is the [F.17.b]
ultimate, but the ultimate is characterized by142 the essencelessness of all
phenomena. Therefore, it is called essencelessness with regard to the ultimate.143
7.7

“Paramārthasamudgata, it is like this: consider essencelessness with
regard to defining characteristics to be exactly like a [nonexistent] sky
flower; consider essencelessness with regard to arising, as well as
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in one of its aspects, to be
exactly like a magic illusion;144 consider essencelessness with regard to the
ultimate in its other aspect, which consists in the selflessness of phenomena
and pervades everything, to be exactly like space, which consists in the
essencelessness of form and pervades everything.145

7.8

“Paramārthasamudgata, with this threefold essencelessness in mind, I
taught what is called the essencelessness of all phenomena. Paramārthasamudgata, having in mind essencelessness with regard to defining characteristics,
I taught, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing,
primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ Why?
Because, Paramārthasamudgata, what lacks a specific defining characteristic
is unborn. What is unborn is unceasing. What is unborn and unceasing is
primordially in the state of peace. What is primordially in the state of peace is
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa. For what is naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,
there is nothing in the slightest that passes into the state of nirvāṇa.
Therefore, having in mind essencelessness with regard to defining
characteristics, I taught, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of
nirvāṇa.’

7.9

“Paramārthasamudgata, having in mind essencelessness with regard to
the ultimate, [F.18.a] which is characterized by selflessness, I taught, ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the
state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ Why? Because
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate, which is characterized by
selflessness, indeed abides permanently and immutably. As the nature of
phenomena, it is unconditioned and free from all afflictions. What
permanently and immutably abides as the very nature of phenomena, being
unconditioned, is unborn and unceasing due to being unconditioned.
Because it is free from all afflictions, it is primordially in the state of peace
and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.146 Therefore, having in mind
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate, which is characterized by
selflessness, I taught, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of
nirvāṇa.’

7.10

“Paramārthasamudgata,

I

did

not

designate

three

kinds

of

essencelessness because those in the world of beings consider that the
imaginary essence and the other-dependent essence, as well as the actual
essence, are different by nature.147 Rather, I did so because they
superimpose an imaginary essence on the other-dependent essence and the
actual essence and because they designate the other-dependent essence and
the actual essence as the defining characteristics of an imaginary essence.
While they designate them in this way, their minds,148 which are saturated
with

designations,
149

predisposed

become

confined

to

such

designations

and

toward them. On this basis, they wrongly conceive the other-

dependent essence and the actual essence as the defining characteristics of
an imaginary essence. [F.18.b] Wrongly conceiving them in this way, with
their wrong conception of the other-dependent essence as the defining
characteristic of an imaginary essence acting as a cause and condition, they
will give rise in the future to an other-dependent essence.150 As a result of
this, they will be afflicted by the afflictions of defilements, karma, and birth.
Because they will not pass beyond saṃsāra, they will transmigrate and
wander among hell beings, animals, hungry ghosts, gods, demigods, and
humans for a very long time.
7.11

“Among these beings, Paramārthasamudgata, some do not produce roots
of virtue from the very beginning. They do not clear obstructions or bring
their mental continuums to maturity. Their confidence in my teaching is
limited and they have not accomplished the accumulations of merit and
gnosis. I impart to those beings the teaching on essencelessness with regard
to arising. Once they have heard this teaching, they understand that
conditioned phenomena arising in dependence on causes are of an
impermanent, unstable, and unreliable nature. They develop aversion and
repulsion towards conditioned phenomena. Once they have done this, they
turn away from wrongdoing. Not committing any wrongdoing, they
establish themselves in virtue. With this as a cause, they produce the roots of
virtue that were yet to be produced. They clear obstructions that were yet to
be cleared. They bring their mental continuums, which were not yet mature,
to maturity. As a result, their confidence in my teaching becomes vast, and
they will accomplish the accumulations of merit and gnosis.

7.12

“Although such beings have produced in this way roots of virtue up to the
accomplishment of the accumulation of merit and gnosis, they [F.19.a] do not
understand essencelessness with regard to arising just as it is, as the
essencelessness

with

regard

to

defining

characteristics

and

the

essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in its two aspects. For this
reason, they will not be completely repulsed by all conditioned phenomena,
completely free from desire, or completely liberated. They will not be

completely liberated from all the afflictions of defilements, karma, and birth.
It is therefore for them that the Tathāgata imparts the teaching on the
essencelessness

with

regard

to

defining

characteristics

and

the

essencelessness with regard to the ultimate. He does so in order to make
them feel repulsion towards all conditioned phenomena, as well as to free
them from desire, to completely liberate them, and to take them perfectly151
beyond the afflictions of defilements, karma, and birth.
7.13

“Once they have heard this teaching, they do not wrongly conceive the
other-dependent essence as the defining characteristic of an imaginary
essence. As a result, they accept the essencelessness with regard to arising
as the essencelessness with regard to defining characteristics and the
essencelessness with regard to the ultimate in its two aspects. They discern
and understand it exactly as it is. It is like this: Their minds,152 which are no
longer saturated with designations, are not confined to these designations
or predisposed toward them. As a result, by attaining the powers of wisdom
in this life and perfectly cutting off the continuity [of the aggregates] into a
future existence, they will put an end to the other-dependent defining
characteristic. On this basis, they will be completely repulsed by all
conditioned phenomena, completely free from desire, and completely
liberated. [F.19.b] They will be completely liberated from all the afflictions of
defilements, karma, and birth.

7.14

“Moreover, Paramārthasamudgata, even those belonging to the lineage of
the hearers’ vehicle attain nirvāṇa, the unsurpassable happiness, through
this very path and journey,153 as do those belonging to the lineage of the
solitary realizers’ vehicle and the lineage of the tathāgatas. This is why it is
the single path of purification for hearers, solitary realizers, and
bodhisattvas. Since there is only a single purification, there is no other.
Therefore, with this in mind, I taught the Single Vehicle. Yet, it is not the case
that those in the world of beings are not of various types corresponding to
their capacities, be they weak, average, or sharp in accordance with their
nature.

7.15

“Paramārthasamudgata, even if they were to exert themselves as all
buddhas did,154 individuals belonging to the hearers’ lineage with the state
of peace as their sole journey could not reach the heart of awakening and
attain the unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening. Why? Because,
having limited compassion and a great fear of suffering, they belong to a
lineage that is by nature inferior. Thus, having limited compassion, they
avoid striving for beings’ welfare. Being afraid of suffering, they stay clear
from the conditioning process of the mental factors.155 However, I did not
teach that avoiding striving for beings’ welfare and staying clear from the

conditioning process of the mental factors was the unsurpassable, complete
and perfect awakening. Therefore, these individuals are called those who have
the state of peace as their sole journey.
7.16

“I taught that hearers who evolve toward awakening belong to the [F.20.a]
category of bodhisattvas because, liberated from the obscuration of
defilements and inspired by the tathāgatas, they liberate their minds from
the obscuration of cognitive objects. It is [only] because they first liberated
themselves from the obscuration of defilements for their own sake that the
Tathāgata designated them as the lineage of hearers.

7.17

“Thus, Paramārthasamudgata, there are beings with various degrees of
confidence in my Dharma and my Vinaya, which are well proclaimed, well
imparted, pure in their intention, and well communicated. In this teaching,
Paramārthasamudgata, the Tathāgata, having in mind the three kinds of
essencelessness, teaches through a discourse of provisional meaning: ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the
state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’

7.18

“Among such beings, Paramārthasamudgata, some have produced roots
of virtue, purified their obscurations, and brought their mental continuum to
maturity. They have much confidence in my teaching and have
accomplished the accumulations of merit and gnosis. Once they have heard
my teaching, they understand my explanations in accordance with my
underlying intent exactly as it is. Moreover, they recognize that this teaching
is the truth.156 Through their wisdom, they realize its meaning exactly as it is.
By also engaging in the practice of this realization, they will very quickly
attain the ultimate state. They will develop faith in these teachings, and
think, ‘Amazing! The Blessed One is completely and perfectly awakened.
Through him, one becomes perfectly awakened with respect to all
phenomena.’

7.19

“Among such beings, some have not produced roots of virtue, purified
their obscurations, and brought their mental continuums to maturity. Their
confidence in my teaching is limited and [F.20.b] they have not accomplished
the accumulations of merit and gnosis. They are honest and sincere. Unable
to evaluate and refute 157 [others’ views], they do not consider their own as
supreme. Once they have heard my teaching, although they do not
understand my explanations in accordance with my underlying intent
exactly as it is, they still develop confidence and faith in these teachings:
‘The Tathāgata’s discourse is profound and has the appearance of
profundity. [Because] emptiness is the topic of this discourse, it is difficult to
perceive and difficult to understand. Being beyond judgment, it does not
belong to the domain of speculation. It can [only] be known by intelligent
scholars well versed in the subtle.’158 They think, ‘We do not understand the

meaning of this sūtra and these teachings that were taught by the Blessed
One. Profound is the awakening of the Buddha and the nature of
phenomena. Only the Tathāgata understands them. We, however, do not.
The Dharma taught by the tathāgatas arises according to the various
inclinations of beings. Their gnosis 159 and perception are infinite, whereas
ours are merely like the [shallow] hoofprints left by a cow.’ Filled with
devotion for these discourses, they also write them down. Having written
them down, they also keep them in mind, read them, propagate them,
venerate them, expound them, recite them, and chant them aloud. However,
because they do not understand these profound teachings in accordance
with my underlying intent, they are unable to engage themselves in the
various aspects of practice. As a consequence of this, they will further
develop their accumulation of merit and gnosis, and those whose mental
continuums are still immature will bring them to maturity.
7.20

“Other beings have not perfectly completed these stages up to the great
accumulation of merit and gnosis. [F.21.a] They are dishonest and insincere.
Capable of evaluating and refuting [others’ views], they consider their own
as supreme. Once they have heard my teaching, they do not understand my
profound explanations in accordance with my underlying intent exactly as it
is. Although they have confidence in this teaching, they wrongly conceive it
according to its literal meaning: ‘All phenomena are only without an essence,
only unborn, only unceasing, only primordially in the state of peace, and only
naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ As a consequence of this, they acquire the
view that all phenomena are inexistent and the view that they are without
defining characteristics. Then, once they have acquired these views, they
negate all phenomena by [negating] all defining characteristics, thereby
negating the imaginary defining characteristic as well as the otherdependent and actual defining characteristics. Why is it said that they
negate all three defining characteristics? Because, Paramārthasamudgata, if
the other-dependent and actual defining characteristics are accepted, then
the imaginary defining characteristic also will be distinctly perceived. Now,
those who consider the other-dependent and actual defining characteristics
as inexistent have already negated the imaginary defining characteristic.
This is why they are called those who negate all three defining characteristics. They
consider my teaching to be the truth while considering some nonsense to be
its meaning. Those who consider my teaching to be the truth while
considering some nonsense to be its meaning cling to my teaching as the
truth while at the same time clinging to some nonsense as its meaning. Since
they have confidence in my teaching, they will progress by developing
virtuous qualities. However, because they wrongly conceive some nonsense

to be the meaning of my teaching, they will stray from wisdom. Straying from
wisdom, [F.21.b] they will stray from the vast and immeasurable virtuous
qualities.
7.21

“Others hear from those beings that my teaching is the truth while some
nonsense is its meaning. Then, delighted by this view, they accept that my
teaching is the truth and some nonsense is its meaning. Thus, they wrongly
conceive my teaching as the truth with some nonsense as its meaning. As a
consequence of this, you should know that they will likewise stray from
virtuous qualities.

7.22

“Others who take no delight in this view are overcome by fear and anxiety
when they hear that all phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of
nirvāṇa. They then say, ‘These are not the words of the Buddha but the
words of Māra!’ Thinking in this way, they reject this discourse, disparage it,
denigrate it, and criticize it. As a consequence of this, they will obtain the
great misfortune as well as the great karmic obscuration [of rejecting the
truth].160 This is precisely why I said, ‘Those who mislead the multitude of
beings into obtaining the great karmic obscuration, who consider all
defining characteristics as inexistent and teach some nonsense as the
meaning of my teaching, are burdened with great karmic obscuration [of
rejecting the truth].

7.23

“Paramārthasamudgata, among such beings, some have not produced
roots of virtue, purified their obscurations, and brought their mental
continuum to maturity. Their confidence in my teaching is limited, and they
have not accomplished the accumulations of merit and gnosis. They are
dishonest and insincere. Although they are unable to evaluate and refute
[others’ views], they consider their own as supreme. When they hear my
teaching, they neither understand my explanations in accordance with my
underlying intent exactly as it is, nor do they develop confidence in this
teaching. They accept that my teaching is not the truth and its meaning is
some nonsense. They say, ‘These are not the words of the Buddha [F.22.a]
but the words of Māra!’ Thinking in this way, they reject this discourse,
disparage it, denigrate it, criticize it, and distort [its meaning]. In many ways,
they apply themselves to discarding, undermining, and subverting this
discourse, considering as enemies those who are devoted to it. From the very
beginning, they are affected by the karmic obscuration [of rejecting the
truth]. As a consequence of this, they also cause [others] to be obscured by
this karmic obscuration. Although it is easy to determine the beginning of
this karmic obscuration, it is difficult to know how many myriad eons it will
last.

“Thus, Paramārthasamudgata, those are the various degrees of confidence
in my Dharma and my Vinaya,161 which are well proclaimed, well imparted,
pure in their intention, and well communicated.”
7.24

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“All phenomena are without an essence, unborn,
Unceasing, primordially in the state of peace,
And naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.
What wise person would say this without an underlying intent?
“I have spoken of essencelessness
With regard to defining characteristics, arising, and the ultimate.
No wise person who understands my underlying intent
Will travel the path leading to corruption.
“There is only one path of purification for all beings,
As there is only one purification, not two.
This is why, even if there are various lineages of beings,
I proclaimed the Single Vehicle.
“In the world of beings, innumerable are
The solitary beings who attain nirvāṇa,
While rare are those who have attained nirvāṇa
And possess the energy and compassion to not turn away from beings.
[F.22.b]
“Subtle, inconceivable, and undifferentiated
Is the uncontaminated domain of those who are liberated.
Nondual and inexpressible, blissful and immutable,
It is the accomplishment of all [intentions], the release from all suffering and
defilements.”

7.25

Then, the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata said to the Blessed One,
“Blessed One, the speech expounding the underlying intent of the buddhas
is subtle, extremely subtle, profound, extremely profound, difficult to
understand, and extremely difficult to understand. How marvelous, how
wonderful it is!
“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization,162 is nominally and conventionally posited as an essential
characteristic or a distinctive characteristic,163 for example as the aggregate
of form, its arising, its cessation, its abandonment, or the comprehension of
this aggregate. What is posited in this way is the imaginary defining

characteristic. For this reason, Blessed One, you referred to essencelessness
with regard to the defining characteristics of phenomena. The phenomenal
appearance of conditioned phenomena, namely, the basis of the imaginary
defining characteristic, the object of conceptualization, is the otherdependent defining characteristic. For this reason, Blessed One, you referred
to essencelessness with regard to both the arising of phenomena and the
ultimate in one of its aspects.
“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: this very phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is devoid of any actuality or essence as that which has an
imaginary defining characteristic.164 [F.23.a] On account of this, this
essencelessness or selflessness of phenomena, true reality, the referential
object conducive to purification, is the actual defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to the essencelessness of phenomena with
regard to the ultimate in its other aspect.
“One should proceed in exactly the same way with the remaining
aggregates as well as with each of the twelve sense domains, the twelve
factors of conditioned existence, the four kinds of sustenance, and the six
and eighteen constituents.
7.26

“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is nominally and conventionally posited as an essential
characteristic or a distinctive characteristic, for example as the noble truth of
suffering or the comprehension of suffering. For this reason, Blessed One,
you referred to essencelessness with regard to the defining characteristics of
phenomena. The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is the other-dependent defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to essencelessness with regard to both the
arising of phenomena and the ultimate in one of its aspects.
“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: This very phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is devoid of any actuality or essence as that which has an
imaginary defining characteristic.165 [F.23.b] On account of this, this
essencelessness or selflessness of phenomena, true reality, the referential
object conducive to purification, is the actual defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to the essencelessness of phenomena with
regard to the ultimate in its other aspect.

“As with the noble truth of suffering, one should proceed in exactly the
same way with the other truths. As with the truths, so one should proceed in
exactly the same way with each of the applications of mindfulness, the selfrestraints, the bases of supernatural powers, the faculties, the forces, the
branches of awakening, and the branches of the path.
7.27

“This is how I understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is nominally and conventionally posited as an essential
characteristic or a distinctive characteristic, for example as correct
concentration,166 its adverse factors and antidotes, its practice, its arising
from being non-arisen, its remaining after it arose, and its maintaining,
resuming, increasing, or expanding. For this reason, Blessed One, you
referred to essencelessness with regard to the defining characteristics of
phenomena. The phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is the other-dependent defining characteristic. For this
reason, Blessed One, you referred to essencelessness with regard to both the
arising of phenomena and the ultimate in one of its aspects.
“This is how I [F.24.a] understand the meaning of the words spoken by the
Blessed One: This very phenomenal appearance of conditioned phenomena,
namely, the basis of the imaginary defining characteristic, the object of
conceptualization, is devoid of any actuality or essence as that which has an
imaginary defining characteristic. On account of this, this essencelessness or
selflessness of phenomena, true reality, the referential object conducive to
purification, is the actual defining characteristic. For this reason, Blessed
One, you referred to the essencelessness of phenomena with regard to the
ultimate in its other aspect.

7.28

“Blessed One, thus it is said, for example, that dried ginger should be
added to all medicinal powders and elixirs. Likewise, this teaching of
definitive meaning expounded by167 the Blessed One in reference to the
statement, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing,
primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’168
should also be added to all the discourses of provisional meaning.169
“Blessed One, it is like this: for example, the canvas for a painting, whether
blue, yellow, red, or white, is identical for all painted figures and thus
perfectly clarifies their contours. Likewise, this teaching of definitive
meaning expounded by the Blessed One in reference to the statement, ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the

state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’ is identical in all
discourses of provisional meaning and thus perfectly clarifies their
interpretable intent.
“Blessed One, it is like this: for example, adding clarified butter to all sorts
of stews, meat dishes, and porridge is delicious. Likewise, it is delightful to
add to all discourses of provisional meaning this teaching of definitive
meaning expounded by the Blessed One in reference to the statement, ‘All
phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the
state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa.’ [F.24.b]
“Blessed One, it is like this: for example, space is identical everywhere
and, [being empty and free from all obstruction,] does not hinder any
endeavor. Likewise, this teaching of definitive meaning expounded by the
Blessed One in reference to the statement, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally
in the state of nirvāṇa,’ is identical in all discourses of provisional meaning
and does not hinder any endeavor in the course of the hearers’, solitary
realizers’, or bodhisattvas’ vehicle.”
7.29

Following these words, the Blessed One complimented the bodhisattva
Paramārthasamudgata: “Excellent, Paramārthasamudgata, this is excellent!
You have understood my explanation in accordance with the Tathāgata’s
underlying intent. Your examples of the dried ginger, painting, clarified
butter, and space perfectly illustrated its point. Paramārthasamudgata, so it
is, and not otherwise. Therefore, keep in mind this teaching in this way.”

7.30

Then, the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata spoke again to the Blessed
One: “In the deer park of Ṛṣivadana in Vārāṇasī, the Blessed One first set in
motion the wonderful wheel of Dharma by teaching the four noble truths to
those who were engaged in the hearers’ vehicle. Not a single god or human
in the world had previously ever turned such a wheel of Dharma. However,
this turning of the Dharma wheel by the Blessed One was surpassable and
adapted to the circumstances. Being of provisional meaning,170 it became a
topic of dispute. Then, for those who were engaged in the Great Vehicle,
[F.25.a] you turned the second, even more wonderful, wheel of Dharma in
the form of a teaching on emptiness: ‘All phenomena are without an essence,
unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the
state of nirvāṇa.’ However, this turning of the Dharma wheel by the Blessed
One was surpassable and adapted to the circumstances. Being of provisional
meaning, it became a topic of dispute. Then, for those who were engaged in
all vehicles,171 you turned the third wonderful Dharma wheel of excellent
discernment in reference to the statement, ‘All phenomena are without an
essence, unborn, unceasing, primordially in the state of peace, and by nature

in the state of nirvāṇa.’172 This turning of the Dharma wheel by the Blessed
One was unsurpassable and not limited to the circumstances. Being of
definitive meaning, it did not become a topic of dispute.
7.31

“Blessed One, when sons or daughters of noble family have heard the
teaching of definitive meaning taught by the Blessed One in reference to the
statement, ‘All phenomena are without an essence, unborn, unceasing,
primordially in the state of peace, and naturally in the state of nirvāṇa,’ they
develop devotion for this teaching and commission its transcription into
writing. Once it has been put into writing, they keep it in mind, read it,
venerate it, propagate it, expound it, chant it aloud, contemplate it, and apply
it in their practice. As they do so, how much merit will they produce?”

7.32

The Blessed One answered, “Paramārthasamudgata, these sons and
daughters of noble family will produce immeasurable and [F.25.b]
incalculable merit. Although it is difficult to illustrate this with examples, I
will briefly explain it to you. Paramārthasamudgata, it is like this: Compared
to the amount of earth, the amount of dirt at the tip of a fingernail does not
come close to a hundredth, a thousandth, a one hundred thousandth of it, or
anything

implying

calculation,

partition,

numeration,

analogy,

or

comparison. Compared to the amount of water contained in the four great
oceans, the amount of water contained in the hoofprint of an ox does not
come close to a hundredth, a thousandth, a one hundred thousandth of it, or
anything

implying

calculation,

partition,

numeration,

analogy,

or

comparison. Likewise, Paramārthasamudgata, compared to the amount of
merit accumulated by developing confidence in my teaching of definitive
meaning up to applying it in one’s practice, the amount of merit accumulated
by developing confidence in my teaching of provisional meaning … up to
applying it in one’s practice does not come close to a hundredth, a
thousandth, a one hundred thousandth of it, or anything implying
calculation, partition, numeration, analogy, or comparison.”
7.33

The bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata inquired, “Blessed One, what is
the name of this teaching as a Dharma discourse that unravels the
Tathāgata’s intent?173 How should I keep it in mind?”174
The Blessed One answered: “Paramārthasamudgata, this is a teaching of
definitive meaning on the ultimate. Therefore, keep it in mind as The Teaching
of Definitive Meaning on the Ultimate.”
As the Blessed One expounded this teaching of definitive meaning on the
ultimate, six hundred thousand beings produced the mind directed at the
unsurpassable, complete and perfect awakening;175 three hundred thousand
hearers purified the Dharma eye from impurities and contaminations; one

hundred and fifty hearers who were without attachment liberated their
minds from all outflows; and seventy-five thousand bodhisattvas attained
the acceptance that phenomena are non-arisen. [F.26.a]
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Paramārthasamudgata—the seventh chapter.

8.

