CHAPTER 2

2.1

Then the bodhisattva Dharmodgata spoke these words: “Blessed One, very
long ago in ancient times, beyond as many universes as there are grains of
sand in seventy-seven Ganges rivers, I was residing in the world Kīrtimat of
the tathāgata Viśālakīrti. There I saw 7,700,000 non-Buddhists, together with
their teachers, who had gathered in one place to consider the ultimate
defining characteristic of phenomena.65 [F.5.b] Although they had examined,
analyzed, investigated, and considered in detail the ultimate defining
characteristic of phenomena, they did not understand it. They had changing
opinions, lacked certainty, and were slow-witted as well as argumentative.
Insulting one another with harsh words, they became abusive, agitated,
unprincipled, and violent. Then, Blessed One, I thought to myself, ‘This is so
sad, and yet, how marvelous, how wonderful are the manifestations of the
tathāgatas in the world and, through their manifestations, the realization and
actualization of the ultimate whose defining characteristic is beyond all
speculation!’ ”66

2.2

The Blessed One answered to the bodhisattva Dharmodgata: “So it is,
Dharmodgata. So it is. I have completely and perfectly awakened to the
ultimate characterized as being beyond all speculation. Yet,67 after I attained
complete and perfect awakening, I communicated through words, gave
explanations,

established

distinctions,

expressed

myself

through

conventions, and imparted teachings. One might ask why I did this. I have
explained that the ultimate is what is cognized by noble beings in a personal
and intuitive way,68 whereas ordinary beings’ knowledge [resulting from
interacting] with one another belongs to the domain of speculation.69
Therefore, Dharmodgata, you should know in this way through this
approach that the ultimate is what is characterized as transcending all
speculation. Moreover, Dharmodgata, I have explained that the ultimate
represents the domain in which there is no phenomenal appearance,70
whereas speculation is the domain of phenomenal appearance. Therefore,

Dharmodgata, you should know in this way through this approach that the
[F.6.a] ultimate is what is characterized as transcending all speculation.
Moreover, Dharmodgata, I have explained that the ultimate is inexpressible,
whereas speculation is the domain of verbalization. Therefore, Dharmodgata,
you should know in this way through this approach that the ultimate is what
is characterized as transcending all speculation. Moreover, Dharmodgata, I
have explained that the ultimate is free from all conventions, whereas
speculation is the domain of conventions. Therefore, Dharmodgata, you
should know in this way through this approach that the ultimate is what is
characterized as transcending all speculation. Moreover, Dharmodgata, I
have explained that the ultimate is devoid of argumentative disputation,
whereas speculation is the domain of argumentative disputation. Therefore,
Dharmodgata, you should know in this way through this approach that the
ultimate is what is characterized as transcending all speculation.71
2.3

“Dharmodgata, it is like this: beings who have only tasted pungent or
bitter flavors their entire lives cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the taste of
honey and sugar. Those who have indulged in desire and have been burnt
by the torment of desire for a long time cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate
the inner happiness of the recluse, which is independent from all
phenomenal appearances related to form, sound, smell, taste, and contact.
Those who have indulged and taken delight in conversations for a long time
cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the inner happiness of the noble beings
who remain silent. Those who have indulged and taken delight in
conventions for a long time through seeing, hearing, discriminating, and
cognizing cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the cessation of all
conventions, the nirvāṇa that is the [F.6.b] extinction of transitory
aggregates. Dharmodgata, it is like this: Those who have indulged and taken
delight in argumentative disputations for a long time on account of their
attachment to the self cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate that there is no
attachment to the self and no argumentative disputations in Uttarakuru.
“Dharmodgata, likewise, those who [have indulged for a long time in]
speculation cannot imagine, infer, or appreciate the ultimate whose defining
characteristic transcends all speculation.”

2.4

Then, at that moment, the Blessed One spoke these verses:
“It is the domain whose characteristic must be intuitively cognized,
Beyond all expressions, apart from all conventions,
And free from argumentative disputations — 72
Such is the ultimate whose characteristic transcends all speculation.”73
This was the chapter of the bodhisattva Dharmodgata—the second chapter.

3.

