

 The Brahma Net Sutra

 Translated by the Buddhist Text Translation Society in USA
 I.   Vairocana Buddha
 At that time, Vairocana Buddha began speaking in general about the Mind-Ground for the benefit
 of the Great Assembly. What he said represents but an infinitesimal part, the tip of a hair, of His
 innumerable teachings — as numerous as the grains of sand in the river Ganges.
 He concluded: "The Mind-Ground has been explained, is being explained and will be explained by
 all the Buddhas — past, present, and future. It is also the Dharma Door (cultivation method) that all

 the Bodhisattvas of the past, present, and future have studied, are studying and will study."
 "I have cultivated this Mind-Ground Dharma Door for hundreds of eons.       My name   is Vairocana. I

 request all Buddhas to transmit my words to all sentient beings, so as to open this path of
 cultivation to all."
 At that time, from his Lion's Throne in the Lotus Treasury World, Vairocana Buddha emitted rays
 of light. A voice among the rays is heard telling the Buddhas seated on thousands of lotus petals,
 "You should practice and uphold the Mind-Ground Dharma Door and transmit it to the
 innumerable Sakyamuni Buddhas, one after another, as well as to all sentient beings. Everyone
 should uphold, read, recite, and singlemindedly put its teachings into practice."
 After receiving the Dharma-door of the Mind-Ground, the Buddhas seated atop the thousands of
 lotus flowers along with the innumerable Sakyamuni Buddhas all arose from their Lion seats, their

 bodies emitting innumerable rays of light. In each of these rays appeared innumerable Buddhas
 who simultaneously made offerings of green, yellow, red and white celestial flowers to Vairocana
 Buddha. They then slowly took their leave.
 The Buddhas then disappeared from the Lotus Treasury World, entered the Essence-Nature
 Empty Space Floral Brilliance Samadhi and returned to their former places under the Bodhi-tree in
 this world of Jambudvipa. They then arose from their samadhi, sat on their Diamond Thrones in

 Jambudvipa and the Heaven of the Four Kings, and preached the Dharma of the "Ten Oceans of
 Worlds."
 Thereupon, they ascended to Lord Shakya's palace and expounded the "Ten Dwellings,"
 proceeded to the Suyama Heaven and taught the "Ten Practices," proceeded further to the Fourth
 Heaven and taught the "Ten Dedications," proceeded further to the Transformation of Bliss
 Heaven and taught the "Ten Dhyana Samadhi," proceeded further to the Heaven of Comfort From
 Others' Emanations and taught the "Ten Grounds," proceeded further to the First Dhyana Heaven
 and taught the "Ten Vajra Stages," proceeded further to the Second Dhyana Heaven and taught
 the "Ten Patiences," and proceeded further to the Third Dhyana Heaven and taught the "Ten
 Vows." Finally, in the Fourth Dhyana Heaven, at Lord Brahma's Palace, they taught the "Mind-
 Ground Dharma-Door" chapter, which Vairocana Buddha, in eons past, expounded in the Lotus
 Treasury World (the cosmos).
 All the other innumerable transformation Sakyamuni Buddhas did likewise in their respective
 worlds as the chapter "Auspicious Kalpa" has explained.
 II. Sakyamuni Buddha

 At that time, Sakyamuni Buddha, after first appearing in the Lotus Treasury World, proceeded to
 the east and appeared in the Heavenly King's palace to teach the "Demon Transforming Sutra."
 He then descended to Jambudvipa to be born in Kapilavastu — his name being Siddhartha and his
 father's name Suddhodana. His mother was Queen Maya. He achieved Enlightenment at the age of
 thirty, after seven years of cultivation, under the name of Sakyamuni Buddha

 The Buddha spoke in ten assemblies from the Diamond Seat at Bodhgaya to the palace of Brahma.

 At that time, he contemplated the wonderful Jewel Net hung in Lord Brahma's palace and preached
 the Brahma Net Sutra for the Great Assembly. He said:
 "The innumerable worlds in the cosmos are like the eyes of the net. Each and every world is
 different, its variety infinite. So too are the Dharma Doors (methods of cultivation) taught by the
 Buddhas.
 "I have come to this world eight thousand times. Based in this Saha World, seated upon the
 Jeweled Diamond Seat in Bodhgaya and all the way up to the palace of the Brahma King, I have
 spoken in general about the Mind-Ground Dharma Door for the benefit of the great multitude.
 "Thereafter, I descended from the Brahma King's palace to Jambudvipa, the Human World. I have
 preached the Diamond Illuminated Jeweled Precepts (the Bodhisattva precepts) from beneath the
 Bodhi-tree for the sake of all sentient beings on earth, however dull and ignorant they may be.
 These precepts were customarily recited by Vairocana Buddha when he first developed the Bodhi
 Mind in the causal stages. They are precisely the original source of all Buddhas and all
 Bodhisattvas as well as the seed of the Buddha Nature.
 "All sentient beings possess this Buddha Nature. All with consciousness, form, and mind are
 encompassed by the precepts of the Buddha Nature. Sentient beings possess the correct cause of
 the Buddha Nature and therefore they will assuredly attain the ever-present Dharma Body.
 For this reason, the ten Pratimoksa (Bodhisattva) precepts came into being in this world. These
 precepts belong to the True Dharma. They are received and upheld in utmost reverence by all
 sentient beings of the Three Periods of Time — past, present and future.
 "Once again, I shall preach for the Great Assembly the chapter on the Inexhaustible Precept
 Treasury. These are the precepts of all sentient beings, the source of the pure Self-Nature."




 Now, I, Vairocana Buddha
 Am sitting atop a lotus pedestal;
 On a thousand flowers surrounding me
 Are a thousand Sakyamuni Buddhas.
 Each flower supports a hundred million worlds;
 In each world a Sakyamuni Buddha appears.
 All are seated beneath a Bodhi-tree,
 All simultaneously attain Buddhahood.
 All these innumerable Buddhas
 Have Vairocana as their original body.
 These countless Sakyamuni Buddhas
 All bring followers along — as numerous as
 motes of dust.
 They all proceed to my lotus pedestal
 To listen to the Buddha's precepts.
 I now preach the Dharma, this exquisite nectar.

 Afterward, the countless Buddhas return to
 their respective worlds
 And, under a Bodhi-tree, proclaim these
 major and minor precepts
 Of Vairocana, the Original Buddha.
 The precepts are like the radiant sun and moon,
 Like a shining necklace of gems,
 Bodhisattvas as numerous as motes of dust
 Uphold them and attain Buddhahood.
 These precepts are recited by Vairocana,
 These precepts I recite as well.
 You novice Bodhisattvas
 Should reverently accept and uphold them.
 And once you have done so,
 Transmit and teach them to sentient beings.
 Now listen attentively as I recite
 The Bodhisattva Pratimoksa — the source of all precepts in the Buddha Dharma.
 All of you in the Great Assembly should firmly believe
 That you are the Buddhas of the future,
 While I am a Buddha already accomplished.
 If you should have such faith at all times,
 Then this precept code is fulfilled.
 All beings with resolve
 Should accept and uphold the Buddha's precepts.
 Sentient beings on receiving them
 Join forthwith the ranks of Buddhas.
 They are in essence equal to the Buddhas,
 They are the true offspring of the Buddhas.
 Therefore, Great Assembly,
 Listen with utmost reverence
 As I proclaim the Bodhisattva Moral Code.

 * A

 III. The Buddha Reciting the Bodhisattva Precepts

 At that time, when Sakyamuni Buddha first attained Supreme Enlightenment under the Bodhi tree,
 he explained the Bodhisattva precepts. The Buddha taught filial piety toward one's parents, Elder
 Masters and the Triple Jewel. Filial piety and obedience, he said, are the Ultimate Path [to
 Buddhahood]. Filial piety is called the precepts — and it means restraint and cessation.
 The Buddha then emitted limitless lights from his mouth. Thereupon, the whole Great Assembly,
 consisting of innumerable Bodhisattvas, the gods of the eighteen Brahma Heavens, the gods of the
 six Desire Heavens, and the rulers of the sixteen great kingdoms all joined their palms and listened

 s ingle mindedly to the Buddha recite the Mahayana precepts.

 The Buddha then said to the Bodhisattvas: Twice a month I recite the precepts observed by all
 Buddhas. All Bodhisattvas, from those who have just developed the Bodhi Mind to the
 Bodhisattvas of the Ten Dwellings, the Ten Practices, the Ten Dedications, and the Ten Grounds
 also recite them. Therefore, this precept-light shines forth from my mouth. It does not arise without
 a cause. This light is neither blue, yellow, red, white, nor black. It is neither form, nor thought. It is
 neither existent nor nonexistent, neither cause nor effect. This precept-light is precisely the
 original source of all Buddhas and all members of this Great Assembly. Therefore all you disciples
 of the Buddha should receive and observe, read, recite and study these precepts with utmost
 attention.
 Disciples of the Buddha, listen attentively! Whoever can understand and accept a Dharma
 Master's words of transmission can receive the Bodhisattva precepts and be called foremost in
 purity. This is true whether that person is a king, a prince, an official, a monk, a nun, or a god of the
 eighteen Brahma Heavens, a god of the six Desire Heavens, or a human, a eunuch, a libertine, a
 prostitute, a slave, or a member of the Eight Divisions of Divinities, a Vajra spirit, an animal, or
 even a transformation-being.
 rv. The Ten Major Precepts

 The Buddhas said to his disciples, "There are ten major Bodhisattva precepts. If one receives the
 precepts but fails to recite them, he is not a Bodhisattva, nor is he a seed of Buddhahood. I, too,
 recite these precepts.

 "All Bodhisattvas have studied them in the past, will study in the future, and are studying them
 now. I have explained the main characteristics of the Bodhisattva precepts. You should study and
 observe them with all your heart."
 The Buddha continued:
 1. First Major Precept

 On Killing
 A disciple of the Buddha shall not himself kill, encourage others to kill, kill by expedient means,
 praise killing, rejoice at witnessing killing, or kill through incantation or deviant mantras. He must
 not create the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of killing, and shall not intentionally kill any
 living creature.

 As a Buddha's disciple, he ought to nurture a mind of compassion and filial piety, always devising
 expedient means to rescue and protect all beings. If instead, he fails to restrain himself and kills
 sentient beings without mercy, he commits a Parajika (major) offense.
 2. Second Major Precept

 On Stealing
 A disciple of the Buddha must not himself steal or encourage others to steal, steal by expedient
 means, steal by means of incantation or deviant mantras. He should not create the causes,
 conditions, methods, or karma of stealing. No valuables or possessions, even those belonging to
 ghosts and spirits or thieves and robbers, be they as small as a needle or blade of grass, may be
 stolen.
 As a Buddha's disciple, he ought to have a mind of mercy, compassion, and filial piety — always
 helping people earn merits and achieve happiness. If instead, he steals the possessions of others,
 he commits a Parajika offense.
 3. Third Major Precept

 On Sexual Misconduct
 A disciple of the Buddha must not engage in licentious acts or encourage others to do so. [As a
 monk] he should not have sexual relations with any female — be she a human, animal, deity or spirit
 — nor create the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of such misconduct. Indeed, he must not
 engage in improper sexual conduct with anyone.
 A Buddha's disciple ought to have a mind of filial piety — rescuing all sentient beings and
 instructing them in the Dharma of purity and chastity. If instead, he lacks compassion and
 encourages others to engage in sexual relations promiscuously, including with animals and even
 their mothers, daughters, sisters, or other close relatives, he commits a Parajika offense.
 4. Fourth    Major Precept
 On Lying and False Speech
 A disciple of the Buddha must not himself use false words and speech, or encourage others to lie or
 lie   by expedient means. He should not involve himself in the causes, conditions, methods, or karma
 of lying, saying that he has seen what he has not seen or vice-versa, or lying implicitly through
 physical or mental means.
 As a Buddha's disciple, he ought to maintain Right Speech and Right Views always, and lead all
 others to maintain them as well. If instead, he causes wrong speech, wrong views or evil karma in
 others, he commits a Parajika offense.
 5. Fifth    Major Precept
 On Selling Alcoholic Beverages
 A disciple of the Buddha must not trade in alcoholic beverages or encourage others to do so. He
 should not create the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of selling any intoxicant whatsoever,
 for intoxicants are the causes and conditions of all kinds of offenses.
 As a Buddha's disciple, he ought to help all sentient beings achieve clear wisdom. If instead, he
 causes them to have upside-down, topsy-turvy thinking, he commits a Parajika offense.
 6. Sixth Major Precept

 On Broadcasting the Faults of the Assembly
 A disciple of the Buddha must not himself broadcast the misdeeds or infractions of Bodhisattva-
 clerics orBodhisattva-laypersons, or of [ordinary] monks and nuns — nor encourage others to do

 so. He must not create the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of discussing the offenses of the

 assembly.
 As a Buddha's disciple, whenever he hears evil persons, externalists or followers of the Two
 Vehicles speak of practices contrary to the Dharma or contrary to the precepts within the Buddhist
 community, he should instruct them with a compassionate mind and lead them to develop
 wholesome faith in the Mahayana.
 If instead, he discusses the faults and misdeeds that occur within the assembly, he commits a
 Parajika offense.
 7. Seventh   Major Precept
 On Praising Oneself and Disparaging Others
 A disciple of the Buddha shall not praise himself and speak        ill   of others, or encourage others to do
 so. He must not create the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of praising himself and
 disparaging others.
 As a disciple of the Buddha, he should be willing to stand in for all sentient beings and endure
 humiliation and slander— accepting blame and letting sentient beings have all the glory. If instead,
 he displays his own virtues and conceals the good points of others, thus causing them to suffer
 slander, he commits a Parajika offense.
 8. Eighth Major Precept
 On Stinginess and Abuse
 A disciple of the Buddha must not be stingy or encourage others to be stingy. He should not create
 the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of stinginess. As a Bodhisattva, whenever a destitute
 person comes for help, he should give that person what he needs. If instead, out of anger and
 resentment, he denies all assistance — refusing to help with even a penny, a needle, a blade of
 grass, even a single sentence or verse or a phrase of Dharma, but instead scolds and abuses that
 person — he commits a Parajika offense.
 9. Ninth Major Precept
 On Anger and Resentment
 A disciple of the Buddha shall not harbor anger or encourage others to be angry. He should not
 create the causes, conditions, methods, or karma of anger.
 As a disciple of the Buddha, he ought to be compassionate and filial, helping all sentient beings
 develop the good roots of non-contention. If instead, he insults and abuses sentient beings, or even
 transformation beings [such as deities and spirits], with harsh words, hitting them with his fists or
                                          — or harbors grudges even when the victim confesses
 feet, or attacking them with a knife or club

 his mistakes and humbly seeks forgiveness in a soft, conciliatory voice — the disciple commits a

 Parajika offense.
 10. Tenth Major Precept
 On Slandering the Triple Jewel
 A Buddha's disciple shall not himself speak     ill   of the Triple Jewel or encourage others to do so. He
 must not create the causes, conditions, methods or karma of slander. If a disciple hears but a single
 word of slander against the Buddha from externalists or evil beings, he experiences a pain similar
 to that of three hundred spears piercing his heart.      How then could he possibly slander the Triple
 Jewel himself?
 Hence, if a disciple lacks faith and filial piety towards the Triple Jewel, and even assists evil
 persons or those of aberrant views to slander the Triple Jewel, he commits a Parajika offense.
 V. Conclusion: The Ten Major Precepts
 As a disciple of the Buddha, you should study these ten parajika (major) precepts and not break
 any one of them in even the slightest way — much less break all of them! Anyone guilty of doing so
 cannot develop the Bodhi Mind in his current life and will lose whatever high position he may have
 attained, be it that of an emperor, Wheel-Turning King, Bhiksu, Bhiksuni — as well as whatever
 level of Bodhisattvahood he may have reached, whether the Ten Dwellings, the Ten Practices, the
 Ten Dedications, the Ten Grounds — and all the fruits of the eternal Buddha Nature. He will lose
 all of those levels of attainment and descend into the Three Evil Realms, unable to hear the words

 "parents" or "Triple Jewel" for eons! Therefore, Buddha's disciples should avoid breaking any
 one of these major precepts. All of you Bodhisattvas should study and observe the Ten Precepts,
 which have been observed, are being observed, and will be observed by all Bodhisattvas. They
 were explained in detail in the chapter, "The Eighty Thousand Rules of Conduct."
 aaa

 AT. The Forty-eight Secondary Precepts
 Then the Buddha told the Bodhisattvas, "Now that I have explained the Ten Major Precepts, I will
 speak about the forty-eight secondary precepts."
 1. Disrespect toward Teachers      and Friends
 A disciple of the Buddha who is destined to become an emperor, a Wheel-Turning King, or high
 official should first receive the Bodhisattva precepts.      He will then be under the protection of all
 guardian deities and spirits, and the Buddhas will be pleased.
 Once he has received the precepts, the disciple should develop a mind of filial piety and respect.
 Whenever he meets an Elder Master, a monk, or a fellow cultivator of like views and like conduct,
 he should rise and greet him with respect. He must then respectfully make offerings to the guest-
 monks, in accord with the Dharma. He should be willing to pledge himself, his family, as well as his
 kingdom, cities, jewels and other possessions.
 If instead, he should develop conceit or arrogance, delusion or anger, refusing to rise and greet
 guest-monks and make offerings to them respectfully, in accordance with the Dharma, he commits
 a secondary offense.
 2.   On Consuming Alcoholic Beverages
 A disciple of the Buddha should not intentionally consume alcoholic beverages, as they are the
 source of countless offenses. If he but offers a glass of wine to another person, his retribution will
 be to have no hands for five hundred lifetimes. How could he then consume liquor himself! Indeed,
 a Bodhisattva should not encourage any person or any other sentient being to consume alcohol,
 much less take any alcoholic beverages himself. A disciple should not drink any alcoholic
 beverages whatsoever. If instead, he deliberately does so or encourages others to do so, he
 commits a secondary offense.
 3.   On Eating Meat
 A disciple of the Buddha must not deliberately eat meat. He should not eat the flesh of any sentient
 being. The meat-eater forfeits the seed of Great Compassion, severs the seed of the Buddha
 Nature and causes [animals and transcendental] beings to avoid him. Those who do so are guilty of
 countless offenses. Therefore, Bodhisattvas should not eat the flesh of any sentient beings
 whatsoever. If instead, he deliberately eats meat, he commits a secondary offense.
 4.   On Five Pungent Herbs
 A disciple of the Buddha should not eat the five pungent herbs — garlic, chives, leeks, onions, and
 asafoetida.This is so even if they are added as flavoring to other main dishes. Hence, if he
 deliberately does so, he commits a secondary offense.
 5.   On Not Teaching Repentance
 If a disciple of the Buddha should see any being violate the Five Precepts, the Eight Precepts, the
 Ten Precepts, other prohibitions, or commit any of the Seven Cardinal Sins or any offense which
 leads to the Eight Adversities — any violations of the precepts whatever— he should counsel the
 offender to repent and reform.
 Hence, if a Bodhisattva does not do so and furthermore continues to live together in the assembly
 with the offender, share in the offerings of the laity, participate in the same Uposatha ceremony
 and recite the precepts — while failing to bring up that person's offense, enjoining him to repent —
 the disciple commits a secondary offense.
                         Dharma or Make Offerings
 6. Failing to Request the

 If an Elder Master, a Mahayana monk or fellow cultivator of like views and practice should come
 from far away to the temple, residence, city or village of a disciple of the Buddha, the disciple
 should respectfully welcome him and see him off. He should minister to his needs at all times,
 though doing so may cost as much as three taels of gold! Moreover, the disciple of the Buddha
 should respectfully request the guest-master to preach the Dharma three times a day by bowing to
 him without a single thought of resentment or weariness. He should be willing to sacrifice himself
 for the Dharma and never be lax in requesting it.
 If he does not act in this manner, he commits a secondary offense.
                    Dharma Lectures
 7. Failing to Attend

 A Bodhisattva disciple who is new to the Order should take copies of the appropriate sutras or
 precept codes to any place where such sutras, commentaries, or moral codes are being explained,
 to listen, study, and inquire about the Dharma. He should go anywhere, be it in a house, beneath a

 tree, in a temple, in the forests or mountains, or elsewhere. If he fails to do so, he commits a
 secondary offense.
 8.   On Turning Away from the Mahayana
 If a disciple of the Buddha disavows the eternal Mahayana sutras and moral codes, declaring that
 they were not actually taught by the Buddha, and instead follows and observes those of the Two
 Vehicles and deluded externalists, he commits a secondary offense.
 9.   On Failure to Care for the Sick
 If a disciple of the Buddha should see anyone who is sick, he should wholeheartedly provide for
 that person's needs just as he would for a Buddha. Of the eight Fields of Blessings, looking after
 the sick is the most important.    A Buddha's disciple should take care of his father, mother, Dharma
 teacher or disciple — regardless of whether the latter are disabled or suffering from various kinds
 of diseases.
 If instead, he becomes angry and resentful and fails to do so, or refuses to rescue the sick or
 disabled in temples, cities and towns, forests and mountains, or along the road, he commits a
 secondary offense.
 10.   On Storing Deadly Weapons
 A disciple of the Buddha should not store weapons such as knives, clubs, bows, arrows, spears,
 axes or any other weapons, nor may he keep nets, traps or any such devices used in destroying life.
 As a disciple of the Buddha, he must not even avenge the death of his parents — let alone kill
 sentient beings! He should not store any weapons or devices that can be used to kill sentient
 beings. If he deliberately does so, he commits a secondary offense.
 The first ten secondary precepts have just been described. Disciples of the Buddha should study
 and respectfully observe them. They are explained in detail in the six chapters [now lost] following
 these precepts.
 11.   On Serving as an Emissary
 A disciple of the Buddha shall not, out of personal benefit or evil intentions, act as a country's
 emissary to foster military confrontation and war causing the slaughter of countless sentient
 beings. As a disciple of the Buddha, he should not be involved in military affairs, or serve as a

 courier between armies, much less act as a willing catalyst for war. If he deliberately does so, he
 commits a secondary offense.
 12.   On Unlawful Business Undertakings
 A disciple of the Buddha must not deliberately trade in slaves or sell anyone into servitude, nor
 should he trade in domestic animals, coffins or wood for caskets. He cannot engage in these types
 of business himself much less encourage others to do so. Otherwise, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 13.   On Slander and Libel
 A disciple of the Buddha must not, without cause and with evil intentions, slander virtuous people,
 such as Elder Masters, monks or nuns, kings, princes or other upright persons, saying that they
 have committed the Seven Cardinal Sins or broken the Ten Major Bodhisattva Precepts. He
 should be compassionate and filial and treat all virtuous people as if they were his father, mother,
 siblings or other close relatives. If instead, he slanders and harms them, he commits a secondary

 offense.
 14.   On Starting Wildfires
 A disciple of the Buddha shall not, out of evil intentions, start wildfires to clear forests and burn
 vegetation on mountains and plains, during the fourth to the ninth months of the lunar year. Such
 fires [are particularly injurious to animals during that period and   may spread] to people's homes,
 towns and villages, temples and monasteries, fields and groves, as well as the [unseen] dwellings
 and possessions of deities and ghosts. He must not intentionally set fire to any place where there is
 life. If he   deliberately does so, he commits a secondary offense.
 15. Teaching Non-Mahayana Dharma

 A disciple of the Buddha must teach one and all, from fellow disciples, relatives and spiritual
 friends, to externalists and evil beings, how to receive and observe the Mahayana sutras and moral
 codes. He should teach the Mahayana principles to them and help them develop the Bodhi Mind —
 as well as the Ten Dwellings, the Ten Practices and the Ten Dedications, explaining the order and
 function of each of these Thirty Minds (levels).
 If instead, the disciple, with evil, hateful intentions, perversely teaches them the sutras and moral
 codes of the Two Vehicle tradition as well as the commentaries of deluded externalists, he thereby
 commits a secondary offense.
 16. Unsound Explanation of the Dharma
 A Bodhisattva Dharma Master must first, with a wholesome mind, study the rules of deportment,
 as well as sutras and moral codes of the Mahayana tradition, and understand their meanings in
 depth. Then, whenever novices come from afar to seek instruction, he should explain, according to
 the Dharma, all the Bodhisattva renunciation practices, such as burning one's body, arm, or finger
 [as the ultimate act in the quest for Supreme Enlightenment]. If a novice is not prepared to follow

 these practices as an offering to the Buddhas, he is not a Bodhisattva monk. Moreover, a
 Bodhisattva monk should be willing to sacrifice his body and limbs for starving beasts and hungry
 ghosts [as the ultimate act of compassion in rescuing sentient beings].
 After these explanations, the Bodhisattva Dharma Master should teach the novices in an orderly
 way, to awaken their minds. If instead, for personal gain, he refuses to teach or teaches in a
 confused manner, quoting passages out of order and context, or teaches in a manner that
 disparages the Triple Jewel, he commits a secondary offense.
 17.   On Exacting Donations
 A disciple of the Buddha must not, for the sake of food, drink, money, possessions or fame,
 approach and befriend kings, princes, or high officials and [on the strength of such relationships],
 exact money, goods or other advantages. Nor may he encourage others to do so. These actions are
 called untoward, excessive demands and lack compassion and filial piety. Such a disciple commits a
 secondary offense.
 18.   On Serving as an Inadequate Master
 A disciple of the Buddha should study the Twelve Divisions of the Dharma and recite the
 Bodhisattva precepts frequently. He should strictly observe these precepts in the Six Periods of the
 day and night and fully understand their meaning and principles as well as the essence of their
 Buddha Nature.
 If instead, the disciple of the Buddha fails to understand even a sentence or a verse of the moral
 code or the causes and conditions related to the precepts, but pretends to understand them, he is
 deceiving both himself and others.   A disciple who understands nothing of the Dharma, yet acts as a
 teacher transmitting the precepts, commits a secondary offense.
 19.   On Double-tongued Speech
 A disciple of the Buddha must not, with malicious intent gossip or spread rumors and slander,
 create discord and disdain for virtuous people. [An example is] disparaging a monk who observes
 the Bodhisattva precepts, as he [makes offerings to the Buddhas by] holding an incense burner to
 his forehead.   A disciple of the Buddha who does so commits a secondary offense.
 20. Failure to Liberate Sentient Beings
 A disciple of the Buddha should have a mind of compassion and cultivate the practice of liberating
 sentient beings. He must reflect thus: throughout the eons of time, all male sentient beings have
 been my father, all female sentient beings my mother. I was born of them, now I slaughter them, I
 would be slaughtering my parents as well as eating flesh that was once my own. This is so because
 all elemental earth, water, fire and air— the   four constituents of all life — have previously been part
 of my body, part of my substance. I must therefore always cultivate the practice of liberating
 sentient beings and enjoin others to do likewise — as sentient beings are forever reborn, again and
 again, lifetime after lifetime. If a Bodhisattva sees an animal on the verge of being killed, he must
 devise a way to rescue and protect it, helping it to escape suffering and death. The disciple should
 always teach the Bodhisattva precepts to rescue and deliver sentient beings.
 On the day his father, mother, and siblings die, he should invite Dharma Masters to explain the
 Bodhisattva sutras and precepts. This will generate merits and virtues and help the deceased either
 to achieve rebirth in the Pure Lands and meet the Buddhas or to secure rebirth in the human or

 celestial realms. If instead, a disciple fails to do so, he commits a secondary offense.

 You should study and respectfully observe the above ten precepts. Each of them is explained in
 detail in the chapter "Expiating Offenses."
 21. On Violence and Vengefulness
 A disciple of the Buddha must not return anger for anger, blow for blow. He should not seek
 revenge, even if his father, mother, siblings, or close relatives are killed — nor should he do so if
 the ruler or king of his country is murdered. To take the life of one being in order to avenge the
 killing of another is contrary to filial piety [as we are all related through the eons of birth and

 rebirth].

 Furthermore, he should not keep others in servitude, much less beat or abuse them, creating evil
 karma of mind, speech and body day after day — particularly the offenses of speech. How much
 less should he deliberately commit the Seven Cardinal Sins. Therefore, if a Bodhisattva-monk

 lacks compassion and deliberately seeks revenge, even for an injustice done to his close relatives,
 he commits a secondary offense.
 22. Arrogance and Failure to Request the Dharma
 A disciple of the Buddha who has only recently left home and is still a novice in the Dharma should
 not be conceited. He must not refuse instruction on the sutras and moral codes from Dharma
 Masters on account of his own intelligence, worldly learning, high position, advanced age, noble
 lineage, vast understanding, great merits, extensive wealth and possessions, etc. Although these
 Masters may be of humble birth, young in age, poor, or suffering physical disabilities, they may still
 have genuine virtue and deep understanding of sutras and moral codes.
 The novice Bodhisattva should not judge Dharma Masters on the basis of their family background
 and refuse to seek instructions on the Mahayana truths from them. If he does so, he commits a
 secondary offense.
 23. On Teaching the Dharma Grudgingly
 After my passing, if a disciple should, with a wholesome mind, wish to receive the Bodhisattva
 precepts, he may make a vow to do so before the images of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas and practice
 repentance before these images for seven days. If he then experiences a vision, he has received
 the precepts. If he does not, he should continue doing so for fourteen days, twenty-one days, or
 even a whole year, seeking to witness an auspicious sign. After witnessing such a sign, he could, in
 front of images of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, formally receive the precepts. If he has not
 witnessed such a sign, although he may have accepted the precepts before the Buddha images, he
 has not actually received the precepts.
 However, the witnessing of auspicious signs is not necessary if the disciple receives the precepts
 directly from a Dharma Master who has himself received the precepts.       Why is this so? It is
 because this is a case of transmission from Master to Master and therefore all that is required is a
 mind of utter sincerity and respect on the part of the disciple.
 If, within a radius   of some three hundred fifty miles, a disciple cannot find a Master capable of
 conferring the Bodhisattva precepts, he may seek to receive them in front of Buddha or
 Bodhisattva images. However, he must witness an auspicious sign.
 If a Dharma Master, on account of his extensive knowledge of sutras and Mahayana moral codes
 as well as his close relationship with kings, princes, and high officials, refuses to give appropriate
 answers to student-Bodhisattvas seeking the meaning of sutras and moral codes, or does so
 grudgingly, with resentment and arrogance, he commits a secondary offense.
 24. Failure to Practice Mahayana Teachings
 If a disciple of the Buddha fails to study Mahayana sutras and moral codes assiduously and
 cultivate correct views, correct nature and the correct Dharma Body, it is like abandoning the
 Seven Precious Jewels for [mere stones]: worldly texts and the Two-Vehicle or externalist
 commentaries. To do so is to create the causes and conditions that obstruct the Path to
 Enlightenment and cut himself off from his Buddha Nature. It is a failure to follow the Bodhisattva
 path. If a disciple intentionally acts in such a manner, he commits a secondary offense.
 25. Unskilled Leadership of the Assembly
 After my passing, if a disciple should serve as an abbot, elder Dharma Master, Precept Master,
 Meditation Master, or Guest Prefect, he must develop a compassionate mind and peacefully settle
 differences within the Assembly — skillfully administering the resources of the Three Jewels,
 spending frugally and not treating them as his own property. If instead, he were to create disorder,
 provoke quarrels and disputes or squander the resources of the Assembly, he would commit a
 secondary offense.
 26. Accepting Personal Offerings
 Once a disciple of the Buddha has settled down in a temple, if visiting Bodhisattva Bhiksus should
 arrive at the temple precincts, the guest quarters established by the king, or even the summer
 retreat quarters, or the quarters of the Great Assembly, the disciple should welcome the visiting
 monks and see them off. He should provide them with such essentials as food and drink, a place to
 live, beds, chairs, and the like. If the host does not have the necessary means, he should be willing

 to pawn himself or cut off and sell his own flesh.

 Whenever there are meal offerings and ceremonies at a layman's home, visiting monks should be
 given a fair share of the offerings. The abbot should send the monks, whether residents or guests,
 to the donor's place in turn [according to their sacerdotal age or merits and virtues]. If only

 resident monks are allowed to accept invitations and not visiting monks, the abbot is committing a
 grievous offense and is behaving no differently than an animal. He is unworthy of being a monk or
 a son of the Buddha, and is guilty of a secondary offense.
 27. Accepting Discriminatory Invitations
 A disciple of the Buddha must not accept personal invitations nor appropriate the offerings for
 himself. Such offerings rightly belong to the Sangha — the whole community of monks and nuns of
 the Ten Directions. To accept personal offerings is to steal the possessions of the Sangha of the
 Ten Directions. It is tantamount to stealing what belongs to the Eight Fields of Blessings: Buddhas,
 Sages, Dharma Masters, Precept Masters, monks/nuns, mothers, fathers, the sick. Such a disciple
 commits a secondary offense.
 28. Issuing Discriminatory Invitations
 A disciple of the Buddha, be he a Bodhisattva monk, lay Bodhisattva, or other donor, should, when
 inviting monks or nuns to conduct a prayer session, come to the temple and inform the monk in
 charge. The monk will then tell him: "Inviting members of the Sangha according to the proper
 order is tantamount to inviting the Arhats of the Ten Directions. To offer a discriminatory special
 invitation to [such a worthy group as] five hundred Arhats or Bodhisattva-monks will not generate
 as much merit as inviting one ordinary monk, if it is his turn.
 There is no provision in the teachings of the Seven Buddhas for discriminatory invitations. To do so
 is   to follow externalist practices and to contradict filial piety [toward all sentient beings]. If a

 disciple deliberately issues a discriminatory invitation, he commits a secondary offense.

 29. On Improper Livelihoods
 A disciple of the Buddha should not, for the sake of gain or with evil intentions, engage in the
 business of prostitution, selling the wiles and charms of men and women. He must also not cook for
 himself, milling and pounding grain. Neither may he act as a fortune-teller predicting the gender of
 children, reading dreams and the like. Nor shall he practice sorcery, work as a trainer of falcons or
 hunting dogs, nor make a living concocting hundreds and thousands of poisons from deadly snakes,
 insects, or from gold and silver. Such occupations lack mercy, compassion, and filial piety [toward
 sentient beings]. Therefore, if a Bodhisattva intentionally engages in these occupations, he
 commits a secondary offense.
 30. On Handling Business Affairs for the Laity
 A disciple of the Buddha must not, with evil intentions, slander the Triple Jewel while pretending to
 be their close adherent — preaching the Truth of Emptiness while his actions are in the realm of
 Existence. Furthermore, he must not handle worldly affairs for the laity, acting as a go-between or
 matchmaker— creating the karma of attachment. Moreover, during the six days of fasting each
 month and the three months of fasting each year, a disciple should strictly observe all precepts,
 particularly against killing, stealing and the rules against breaking the fast. Otherwise, the disciple
 commits a secondary offense.
 A Bodhisattva should respectfully study and observe the ten preceding precepts. They are
 explained in detail in the Chapter on "Prohibitions".
 31. Rescuing Clerics Along with Sacred Objects
 After my passing, in the evil periods that will follow, there will be externalists, evil persons, thieves
 and robbers who steal and sell statues and paintings of Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and [those to whom
 respect is due such as] their parents. They may even peddle copies of sutras and moral codes, or
 sell monks, nuns or those who follow the Bodhisattva Path or have developed the Bodhi            Mind to
 serve as retainers or servants to officials and others.
 A disciple of the Buddha, upon witnessing such pitiful events, must develop a mind of compassion
 and find ways to rescue and protect all persons and valuables, raising funds wherever he can for
 this purpose. If a Bodhisattva does not act in this manner, he commits a secondary offense.

 32. On Harming Sentient Beings
 A disciple of the Buddha must not sell knives, clubs, bows, arrows, other life-taking devices, nor
 keep altered scales or measuring devices. He should not abuse his governmental position to
 confiscate people's possessions, nor should he, with malice at heart, restrain or imprison others or
 sabotage their success. In addition, he should not raise cats, dogs, foxes, pigs and other such
 animals. If he intentionally does such things, he commits a secondary offense.
 33. On Watching Improper Activities
 A disciple of the Buddha must not, with evil intentions, watch people fighting or the battling of
 armies, rebels, gangs and the like, should not listen to the sounds of conch shells, drums, horns,
 guitars, flutes, lutes, songs or other music, nor should he be party to any form of gambling, whether
 dice, checkers, or the like. Furthermore, he should not practice fortune -telling or divination nor

 should he be an accomplice to thieves and bandits. He must not participate in any of these
 activities. If instead, he intentionally does so, he commits a secondary offense.

 34. Temporary Abandoning of the Bodhi Mind
 A disciple of the Buddha should observe the Bodhisattva precepts every day, whether walking,
 standing, reclining or seated — reading and reciting them day and night. He should be resolute in
 keeping the precepts, as strong as a diamond, as desperate as a shipwrecked person clinging to a
 small log while attempting to cross the ocean, or as principled as the "Bhiksu bound by reeds".
 Furthermore, he should always have a wholesome faith in the teachings of the Mahayana.
 Conscious that sentient beings are Buddhas-to-be while the Buddhas are realized Buddhas, he
 should develop the Bodhi Mind and maintain it in each and every thought, without retrogression.
 If a Bodhisattva has but a single thought in the direction of the Two Vehicles or externalist
 teachings, he commits a secondary offense.
 35. Failure to Make Great Vows
 A Bodhisattva must make many great vows — to be filial to his parents and Dharma teachers, to
 meet good spiritual advisors, friends, and colleagues who will keep teaching him the Mahayana
 sutras and moral codes as well as the Stages of Bodhisattva Practice (the Ten Dwellings, the Ten
 Practices, the Ten Dedications, and the Ten Grounds). He should further vow to understand these
 teachings clearly so that he can practice according to the Dharma while resolutely keeping the
 precepts of the Buddhas. If necessary, he should lay down his life rather than abandon this resolve
 for even a single moment. If a Bodhisattva does not make such vows, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 36. Failure to Make Resolutions
 Once a Bodhisattva has made these Great Vows, he should strictly keep the precepts of the
 Buddhas and make the following resolutions:
 1.- 1 would rather jump into a raging blaze, a deep abyss, or into a mountain of knives, than engage

 in impure actions with any woman, thus violating the sutras and moral codes of the Buddhas of the

 Three Periods of Time.
 2.- I would rather wrap myself a thousand times with a red-hot iron net, than let this body, should it

 break the precepts, wear clothing provided by the faithful.
 I would rather swallow red hot iron pellets and drink molten iron for hundreds of thousands of eons,

 than let this mouth, should it break the precepts, consume food and drink provided by the faithful.
 I would rather lie on a bonfire or a burning iron net than let this body, should it break the precepts,

 rest on bedding, blankets and mats supplied by the faithful.
 I would rather be impaled for eons by hundreds of spears, than let this body, should it break the

 precepts, receive medications from the faithful.
 I would rather jump into a cauldron of boiling oil and roast for hundreds of thousands of eons, than

 let this body, should it break the precepts, receive shelter, groves, gardens, or fields from the

 faithful.

 3.- 1 would rather be pulverized from head to toe by an iron sledge hammer, than let this body,

 should it break the precepts, accept respect and reverence from the faithful.
 4.- 1 would rather have both eyes blinded by hundreds of thousands of swords and spears, rather

 than break the precepts by looking at beautiful forms. [In the same vein, I shall keep my mind from
 being sullied by exquisite sounds, fragrances, food and sensations.]
 5.- 1 further vow that all sentient beings will achieve Buddhahood.
 If a disciple of the Buddha does not make the preceding great resolutions, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 37. Traveling in Dangerous Areas
 [As a cleric], a disciple of the Buddha should engage in ascetic practices twice each year. He should
 sit in meditation, winter and summer, and observe the      summer retreat. During those periods, he
 should always carry eighteen essentials such as a willow branch (for a toothbrush), ash-water (for
 soap), the traditional three clerical robes, an incense burner, a begging bowl, a sitting mat, a water
 filter, bedding, copies   of sutras and moral codes as well as statues of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
 When practicing austerities and when traveling, be it for thirty miles or three hundred miles, a
 cleric should always have the eighteen essentials with him. The two periods of austerities are from

 the 15th of the first lunar month to the 15th of the third month, and from the 15th of the eighth lunar
 month to the 15th of the tenth month. During the periods of austerities, he requires these eighteen
 essentials just as a bird needs its two wings.
 Twice each month, the novice Bodhisattva should attend the Uposattha ceremony and recite the
 Ten Major and Forty-eight Secondary Precepts. Such recitations should be done before images of
 the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. If only one person attends the ceremony, then he should do the
 reciting. If two, three, or even hundreds of thousands attend the ceremony, still only one person

 should recite. Everyone else should listen in silence. The one reciting should sit on a higher level
 than the audience, and everyone should be dressed in clerical robes. During the summer retreat,
 each and every activity should be managed in accordance with the Dharma.
 When practicing the austerities, the Buddhist disciple should avoid dangerous areas, unstable
 kingdoms, countries ruled by evil kings, precipitous terrains, remote wildernesses, regions
 inhabited by bandits, thieves, or lions, tigers, wolves, poisonous snakes, or areas subject to
 hurricanes, floods and fires. The disciple should avoid all such dangerous areas when practicing the
 austerities and also when observing the summer retreat. Otherwise, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 38. Order of Seating Within the Assembly
 A disciple of the Buddha should sit in the proper order when in the Assembly. Those who received
 the Bodhisattva precepts first sit first, those who received the precepts afterwards should sit
 behind. Whether old or young, a Bhiksu or Bhiksuni, a person of status, a king, a prince, a eunuch,
 or a servant, etc., each should sit according to the order in which he received the precepts.
 Disciples of the Buddha should not be like externalists or deluded people who base their order on
 age or sit without any order at all — in barbarian fashion. In my Dharma, the order of sitting is
 based on seniority of ordination.
 Therefore, if a Bodhisattva does not follow the order of sitting according to the Dharma, he
 commits a secondary offense.
 39. Failure to Cultivate Merits and Wisdom
 A disciple of the Buddha should constantly counsel and teach all people to establish monasteries,
 temples and pagodas in mountains and forests, gardens and fields. He should also construct stupas
 for the Buddhas and buildings for winter and summer retreats. All facilities required for the
 practice of the Dharma should be established.
 Moreover, a disciple of the Buddha should explain Mahayana sutras and the Bodhisattva precepts
 to all sentient beings. In times of sickness, national calamities, impending warfare or upon the

 death of one's parents, brothers and sisters, Dharma Masters and Precept Masters, a Bodhisattva
 should lecture and explain Mahayana sutras and the Bodhisattva precepts weekly for up to seven
 weeks.
 The disciple should read, recite, and explain the Mahayana sutras and the Bodhisattva precepts in
 all prayer gatherings, in his business undertakings and during periods of calamity — fire, flood,

 storms, ships lost at sea in turbulent waters or stalked by demons ... In the same vein, he should do
 so in order to transcend evil karma, the Three Evil Realms, the Eight Difficulties, the Seven
 Cardinal Sins, all forms of imprisonment, or excessive sexual desire, anger, delusion, and illness.
 If a novice Bodhisattva fails to act as indicated, he commits a secondary offense.
 *

 **

 The Bodhisattva should study and respectfully observe the nine precepts just mentioned above, as
 explained in the "Brahma Altar" chapter.
 40. Discrimination in Conferring the Precepts
 A disciple of the Buddha should not be selective and show preference in conferring the Bodhisattva
 precepts. Each and every person can receive the precepts — kings, princes, high officials, Bhiksus,
 Bhiksunis, laymen, laywomen, libertines, prostitutes, the gods in the eighteen Brahma Heavens or
 the six Desire Heavens, asexual persons, bisexual persons, eunuchs, slaves, or demons and ghosts
 of all types. Buddhist disciples should be instructed to wear robes and sleep on cloth of a neutral
 color, formed by blending blue, yellow, red, black and purple dyes all together.

 The clothing of monks and nuns should, in all countries, be different from those worn by ordinary
 persons.
 Before someone is allowed to receive the Bodhisattva precepts, he should be asked: "have you
 committed any of the Cardinal Sins?" The Precept Master should not allow those who have
 committed such sins to receive the precepts.
 Here are the Seven Cardinal Sins: shedding the Buddha's blood, murdering an Arhat, killing one's
 father, killing one's mother, murdering a Dharma Teacher, murdering a Precept Master or
 disrupting the harmony of the Sangha.
 Except for those who have committed the Cardinal Sins, everyone can receive the Bodhisattva
 precepts.
 The Dharma rules of the Buddhist Order prohibit monks and nuns from bowing down before rulers,
 parents, relatives, demons and ghosts.
 Anyone who understands the explanations of the Precept Master can receive the Bodhisattva
 precepts. Therefore, if a person were to come from thirty to three hundred miles away seeking the
 Dharma and the Precept Master, out of meanness and anger, does not promptly confer these
 precepts, he commits a secondary offense.
 41. Teaching for the Sake of Profit
 If a disciple of the Buddha, when teaching others and developing their faith in the Mahayana,
 should discover that a particular person wishes to receive the Bodhisattva precepts, he should act
 as a teaching master and instruct that person to seek out two Masters, a Dharma Master and a
 Precept Master.
 These two Masters should ask the Precept candidate whether he has committed any of the Seven
 Cardinal Sins in this life. If he has, he cannot receive the precepts. If not, he may receive the
 precepts.
 If he has broken any of the Ten Major Precepts, he should be instructed to repent before the
 statues of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. He should do so six times a day and recite the Ten Major
 and Forty-eight Minor Precepts, paying respect with utter sincerity to the Buddhas of the Three
 Periods of Time. He should continue in this manner until he receives an auspicious response, which
 could occur after seven days, fourteen days, twenty-one days, or even a year. Examples of
 auspicious signs include: experiencing the Buddhas rub the crown of one's head, or seeing lights,
 halos, flowers and other such rare phenomena.
 The witnessing of an auspicious sign indicates that the candidate's karma has been dissipated.
 Otherwise, although he has repented, it was of no avail. He still has not received the precepts.
 However, the merits accrued will increase his chances of receiving the precepts in a future lifetime.
 Unlike the case of a major Bodhisattva precept, if a candidate has violated any of the Forty-eight
 Secondary Precepts, he can confess his infraction and sincerely repent before Bodhisattva-monks
 or nuns. After that, his offense will be eradicated.
 The officiating Master, however, must fully understand the Mahayana sutras and moral codes, the
 secondary as well as the major Bodhisattva precepts, what constitutes an offense and what does
 not, the truth of Primary Meaning, as well as the various Bodhisattva cultivation stages — the Ten

 Dwellings, the Ten Practices, the Ten Dedications, the Ten Grounds, and Equal and Wonderful
 Enlightenment.
 He should also know the type and degree of contemplation required for entering and exiting these
 stages and be familiar with the Ten Limbs of Enlightenment as well as a variety of other
 contemplations.
 If he is not familiar with the above and, out of greed for fame, disciples or offerings, he makes a
 pretense of understanding the sutras and moral codes, he is deceiving himself as well as others.
 Hence, if he intentionally acts as Precept Master, transmitting the precepts to others, he commits a
 secondary offense.
 42. Reciting the Precepts to Evil Persons
 A disciple of the Buddha should not, with a greedy motive, expound the great precepts of the
 Buddhas before those who have not received them, externalists or persons with heterodox views.
 Except in the case of kings or supreme rulers, he may not expound the precepts before any such
 person.
 Persons who hold heterodox views and do not accept the precepts of the Buddhas are untamed in
 nature. They will not, lifetime after lifetime, encounter the Triple Jewel. They are as mindless as
 trees and stones; they are no different from wooden stumps. Hence, if a disciple of the Buddha
 expounds the precepts of the Seven Buddhas before such persons, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 43. Thoughts of Violating the Precepts
 If a disciple of the Buddha joins the Order out of pure faith, receives the correct precepts of the
 Buddhas, but then develops thoughts of violating the precepts, he is unworthy of receiving any
 offerings from the faithful, unworthy of walking on the ground of his motherland, unworthy of
 drinking its water.
 Five thousand guardian spirits constantly block his way, calling him "Evil thief!" These spirits
 always follow him into people's homes, villages and towns, sweeping away his very footprints.
 Everyone curses such a disciple, calling him a "Thief within the Dharma." All sentient beings avert
 their eyes, not wishing to see him.
 A disciple of the Buddha who breaks the precepts is no different from an animal or a wooden
 stump. Hence, if a disciple intentionally violates the correct precepts, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 44. Failure to Honor the Sutras and Moral Codes
 A disciple of the Buddha should always s ingle mindedly receive, observe, read and recite the
 Mahayana sutras and moral codes. He should copy the sutras and moral codes onto bark, paper,
 fine cloth, or bamboo slats and not hesitate to use his own skin as paper, draw his own blood for ink

 and his marrow for ink solvent, or split his bones for use as pens. He should use precious gems,
 priceless incense and flowers and other precious things to make and adorn covers and cases to
 store the sutras and codes.
 Hence, if he does not make offerings to the sutras and moral codes, in accordance with the
 Dharma, he commits a secondary offense.
 45. Failure to Teach Sentient Beings

                                                                                             a

 A disciple of the Buddha should develop a mind of Great Compassion. Whenever he enters
 people's homes, villages, cities or towns, and sees sentient beings, he should say aloud, "You
 sentient beings should all take the Three Refuges and receive the Ten [Major Bodhisattva]
 Precepts." Should he come across cows, pigs, horses, sheep and other kinds of animals, he should
 concentrate and say aloud, "You are now animals; you should develop the Bodhi Mind."            A
 Bodhisattva, wherever he goes, be it climbing a mountain, entering a forest, crossing a river, or
 walking through a field should help all sentient beings develop the Bodhi Mind.
 If a disciple of the Buddha does not wholeheartedly teach and rescue sentient beings in such a
 manner, he commits a secondary offense.
 46. Preaching in an Inappropriate Manner
 A disciple of the Buddha should always have a mind of Great Compassion to teach and transform
 sentient beings. Whether visiting wealthy and aristocratic donors or addressing D ha nn
 gatherings, he should not remain standing while explaining the Dharma to laymen, but should
 occupy a raised seat in front of the lay assembly.
 A Bhiksu serving as Dharma instructor must not be standing while lecturing to the Fourfold
 Assembly. During such lectures, the Dharma Master should sit on a raised seat amidst flowers and
 incense, while the Fourfold Assembly must listen from lower seats. The Assembly must respect and
 follow the Master like filial sons obeying their parents orBrahmans worshipping fire. If a Dharma
 Master does not follow these rules while preaching the Dharma, he commits a secondary offense.
 47. On Regulations Against the Dharma
 A disciple of the Buddha who has accepted the precepts of the Buddhas with a faithful mind, must
 not use his high official position (as a king, prince, official, etc.) to undermine the moral code of the
 Buddhas. He may not establish rules and regulations preventing the four kinds of lay disciples from
 joining the Order and practicing the Way, nor may he prohibit the making of Buddha or
 Bodhisattva images, statues and stupas, or the printing and distribution of sutras and codes.
 Likewise, he must not establish rules and regulations placing controls on the Fourfold Assembly. If
 highly placed lay disciples engage in actions contrary to the Dharma, they are no different from
 vassals in the service of [illegitimate] rulers.
 A Bodhisattva should rightfully receive respect and offerings from all. If instead, he is forced to
 defer to officials, this is contrary to the Dharma, contrary to the moral code.
 Hence, if a king or official has received the Bodhisattva precepts with a wholesome mind, he should
 avoid offenses that harm the Three Jewels. If instead, he intentionally commits such acts, he is
 guilty of a secondary offense.
 48. On Destroying the Dharma
 A disciple of the Buddha who becomes a monk with wholesome intentions must not, for fame or
 profit, explain the precepts to kings or officials in such a way as to cause monks, nuns or laymen

 who have received the Bodhisattva precepts to be tied up, thrown into prison or forcefully
 conscripted. If a Bodhisattva acts in such a manner, he is no different from a worm in a lion's body,
 eating away at the lion's flesh. This is not something a worm living outside the lion can do.
 Likewise, only disciples of the Buddhas can bring down the Dharma — no externalist or demon can
 do so.
 Those who have received the precepts of the Buddha should protect and observe them just as a
 mother would care for her only child or a filial son his parents. They must not break the precepts.
 If a Bodhisattva hears externalists or evil-minded persons speak ill of, or disparage, the precepts
 of the Buddhas, he should feel as though his heart were pierced by three hundred spears, or his
 body stabbed with a thousand knives or thrashed with a thousand clubs. He would rather suffer in
 the hells himself for a hundred eons than hear evil beings disparage the precepts of the Buddha.
 How much worse it would be if the disciple were to break the precepts himself or incite others to do
 so! This is indeed an unfilial mind! Hence, if he violates the precepts intentionally, he commits a

 secondary offense.
 The preceding nine precepts should be studied and respectfully observed with utmost faith.
 VII. Conclusion
 The Buddha said, "All of you disciples! These are the Forty-eight Secondary Precepts that you
 should observe. Bodhisattvas of the past have recited them, those of the future will recite them,
 those of the present are now reciting them.
 "Disciples of the Buddha! You should all listen! These Ten Major and Forty-eight Secondary
 Precepts are recited by all Buddhas of the Three Periods of Time — past, present, and future. I now
 recite them as well."
 VTII. Epilogue
 The Buddha continued: "Everyone in the Assembly — kings, princes, officials, Bhiksus, Bhiksunis,
 laymen, laywomen and those who have received the Bodhisattva precepts — should receive and
 observe, read and recite, explain and copy these precepts of the eternal Buddha Nature so that
 they can circulate without interruption for the edification of all sentient beings. They will then
 encounter the Buddhas and receive the teachings from each one in succession. Lifetime after
 lifetime, they will escape the Three Evil Paths and the Eight Difficulties and will always be reborn

 in the human and celestial realms."

 I have concluded a general explanation of the precepts of the Buddhas beneath this Bodhi Tree. All

 in this Assembly should s ingle mindedly study the Pratimoksa precepts and joyfully observe them.

 These precepts are explained in detail in the exhortation section of the "Markless Celestial King"
 chapter.
 At that time, the Bodhisattvas of the Three Thousand World System (cosmos) sat listening with
 utmost reverence to the Buddha reciting the precepts. They then joyously received and observed
 them.
 As Buddha Sakyamuni finished explaining the Ten Inexhaustible Precepts of the "Mind-Ground
 D ha nn a Door" chapter, (which Vairocana Buddha had previously proclaimed in the Lotus Flower
 Treasury World), countless other Sakyamuni Buddhas did the same.
 As Sakyamuni Buddha preached in ten different places, from the Mahesvara Heaven Palace to the
 Bodhi Tree, for the benefit of countless Bodhisattvas and other beings, all the countless Buddhas in
 the infinite lands of the Lotus Treasury World did the same.
 They explained the Buddha's Mind Treasury (the Thirty Minds), Ground Treasury, Precept
 Treasury, Infinite Actions and Vows Treasury, the Treasury of the Ever-Present Buddha Nature as
 Cause and Effect of Buddhahood. Thus, all the Buddhas completed their expositions of the
 countless Dharma Treasuries.
 All sentient beings throughout the billions of worlds gladly receive and observe these Teachings.
 The characteristics of the Mind-Ground are explained in greater detail in the chapter "Seven
 Forms of Conduct of the Buddha Floral Brilliance King."
 FX. Verses of Praise
 The sages with great samadhi and wisdom
 Can observe this teaching;
 Even before reaching Buddhahood
 They are blessed with five benefits:
 First, the Buddhas of the Ten Directions

 Always keep them in mind and protect them.
 Secondly, at the time of death
 They hold correct views with a joyous mind.
 Third, wherever they are reborn,
 The Bodhisattvas are their friends.
 Fourth, merits and virtues abound as

 The Paramita of Precepts is accomplished.
 Fifth, in this life and in succeeding ones,

 Observing all precepts, they are filled with
 merits and wisdom.


 Such disciples are sons of the Buddha.
 Wise people should ponder this well.
 Common beings clinging to marks and self
 Cannot obtain this teaching.
 Nor can followers of the Two Vehicles,
 abiding in quietude,


 Plant their seeds within it.
 To nurture the sprouts of Bodhi,
 To illuminate the world with wisdom,
 You should carefully observe
 The True Mark of all dharmas:
 Neither born nor unborn,
 Neither eternal nor extinct,
 Neither the same nor different,
 Neither coming nor going.
 In that single minded state
 The disciple should diligently cultivate
 And adorn the Bodhisattva's practices and deeds
 In sequential order.
 Between the teachings of study and non-study,
 One should not develop thoughts of discrimination.
 This is the Foremost Path —
 Also known as Mahayana.
 All offenses of idle speculation and meaningless debate
 Invariably disappear at this juncture;
 The Buddha's omniscient wisdom
 Also arises from this.
 Therefore, all disciples of the Buddha
 Should develop great resolve,
 And strictly observe the Buddha's precepts
 As though they were brilliant gems.
 All Bodhisattvas of the past
 Have studied these precepts;
 Those of the future will also study them.
 Those of the present study them as well.
 This is the path walked by the Buddhas,
 And praised by the Buddhas.
 I have now finished explaining the precepts,

 The body of immense merit and virtue.
 I now transfer them all to sentient beings;

 May they all attain Supreme Wisdom;
 May the sentient beings who hear this Dharma
 All attain Buddhahood.

 X. Verses of Dedication
 In the Lotus Treasury World,
 Vairocana explained an infinitesimal part of the Mind-Ground Door,
 Transmitting it to the Sakyamunis:
 Major and minor precepts are clearly delineated,
 All sentient beings receive immense benefits.




 40. Discrimination in Conferring the Precepts
 A disciple of the Buddha should not be selective and show preference in conferring the Bodhisattva
 precepts. Each and every person can receive the precepts — kings, princes, high officials, Bhiksus,
 Bhiksunis, laymen, laywomen, libertines, prostitutes, the gods in the eighteen Brahma Heavens or
 the six Desire Heavens, asexual persons, bisexual persons, eunuchs, slaves, or demons and ghosts
 of all types. Buddhist disciples should be instructed to wear robes and sleep on cloth of a neutral
 color, formed by blending blue, yellow, red, black and purple dyes all together.
 The clothing of monks and nuns should, in all countries, be different from those worn by ordinary
 persons.
 Before someone is allowed to receive the Bodhisattva precepts, he should be asked: "have you
 committed any of the Cardinal Sins?" The Precept Master should not allow those who have
 committed such sins to receive the precepts.
 Here are the Seven Cardinal Sins: shedding the Buddha's blood, murdering an Arhat, killing one's
 father, killing one's mother, murdering a Dharma Teacher, murdering a Precept Master or
 disrupting the harmony of the Sangha.
 Except for those who have committed the Cardinal Sins, everyone can receive the Bodhisattva
 precepts.
 The Dharma rules of the Buddhist Order prohibit monks and nuns from bowing down before rulers,
 parents, relatives, demons and ghosts.
 Anyone who understands the explanations of the Precept Master can receive the Bodhisattva
 precepts. Therefore, if a person were to come from thirty to three hundred miles away seeking the
 Dharma and the Precept Master, out of meanness and anger, does not promptly confer these
 precepts, he commits a secondary offense.
 41. Teaching for the Sake of Profit
 If a disciple of the Buddha, when teaching others and developing their faith in the Mahayana,
 should discover that a particular person wishes to receive the Bodhisattva precepts, he should act
 as a teaching master and instruct that person to seek out two Masters, a Dharma Master and a
 Precept Master.
 These two Masters should ask the Precept candidate whether he has committed any of the Seven
 Cardinal Sins in this life. If he has, he cannot receive the precepts. If not, he may receive the
 precepts.
 If he has broken any of the Ten Major Precepts, he should be instructed to repent before the
 statues of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. He should do so six times a day and recite the Ten Major
 and Forty-eight Minor Precepts, paying respect with utter sincerity to the Buddhas of the Three
 T*Ai*!nrlc nf TimA TTa chmilrl cnntinnp in thic nionnpi'nntil Via n>ppiv«« an mic nir>ir»iic m«nnn«p viliir>li





 could occur after seven days, fourteen days, twenty-one days, or even a year. Examples of
 auspicious signs include: experiencing the Buddhas rub the crown of one's head, or seeing lights,
 halos, flowers and other such rare phenomena.
 The witnessing of an auspicious sign indicates that the candidate's karma has been dissipated.
 Otherwise, although he has repented, it was of no avail. He still has not received the precepts.
 However, the merits accrued will increase his chances of receiving the precepts in a future lifetime.
 Unlike the case of a major Bodhisattva precept, if a candidate has violated any of the Forty-eight
 Secondary Precepts, he can confess his infraction and sincerely repent before Bodhisattva-monks
 or nuns. After that, his offense will be eradicated.
 The officiating Master, however, must fully understand the Mahayana sutras and moral codes, the
 secondary as well as the major Bodhisattva precepts, what constitutes an offense and what does
 not, the truth of Primary Meaning, as well as the various Bodhisattva cultivation stages — the Ten

 Dwellings, the Ten Practices, the Ten Dedications, the Ten Grounds, and Equal and Wonderful
 Enlightenment.
 He should also know the type and degree of contemplation required for entering and exiting these
 stages and be familiar with the Ten Limbs of Enlightenment as well as a variety of other
 contemplations.
 If he is not familiar with the above and, out of greed for fame, disciples or offerings, he makes a
 pretense of understanding the sutras and moral codes, he is deceiving himself as well as others.
 Hence, if he intentionally acts as Precept Master, transmitting the precepts to others, he commits a
 secondary offense.
 42. Reciting the Precepts to Evil Persons
 A disciple of the Buddha should not, with a greedy motive, expound the great precepts of the
 Buddhas before those who have not received them, externalists or persons with heterodox views.
 Except in the case of kings or supreme rulers, he may not expound the precepts before any such
 person.
 Persons who hold heterodox views and do not accept the precepts of the Buddhas are untamed in
 nature. They will not, lifetime after lifetime, encounter the Triple Jewel. They are as mindless as
 trees and stones; they are no different from wooden stumps. Hence, if a disciple of the Buddha
 expounds the precepts of the Seven Buddhas before such persons, he commits a secondary
 offense.
 43. Thoughts of Violating the Precepts








